Article: 1
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Abortion is ancient history: Long before Roe, women terminated pregnancies
Author: Katie Hunt
Publication_Date: Published 7:29 AM EDT, Fri June 23, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  — Abortion today, at least in the United States, is a political, legal and moral powder keg. But for long stretches of history, terminating an unwanted pregnancy, especially in the early stages, was a relatively uncontroversial fact of life, historians say. Egyptian papyrus, Greek plays, Roman coins, the medieval biographies of saints, medical and midwifery manuals, and Victorian newspaper and pamphlets reveal that abortion was more common in premodern times than people might think. This long view of abortion matters, according to Mary Fissell, a professor of the history of medicine at Johns Hopkins University. That’s because assumptions about how abortion was viewed in the past color present-day arguments about abortion rights. Those rights have been severely restricted in many US states since Roe v. Wade, the 1973 Supreme Court ruling that effectively made abortion legally available, was overturned on June 24, 2022, by the US Supreme Court in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Abortion opponents portray the rights granted by Roe v. Wade and legal access to abortion as an historical aberration, according to Fissell, which is not accurate, historians say. “We have to understand that this is much more changeable than we’ve been led to believe. There’s a steady constant of women terminating pregnancies throughout history, but the meanings of that act have changed very significantly over time and will continue to change,” said Fissell, who is working on “Long Before Roe,” a book on the history of abortion that will publish in 2025. “The Dobbs decision was not inevitable, but rather a part of a much longer cycle of restriction versus acceptance,” she said. Earliest references to abortion The first written references to abortion are contained in an ancient Egyptian papyrus written about 3,500 years ago. The Ebers Papyrus, a medical text, suggested around 1550 BC that abortion could be induced using a “plant-fibre tampon coated with a compound that included honey and crushed dates.” In ancient Greek and Rome, references to abortion and botanical substances that induce abortion were common in medical and other texts — although it’s not clear how widely they were used, Fissell said. In 411 BC, Greek playwright Aristophanes in his play Lysistrata described a desirable young woman as “trimmed and spruced with pennyroyal,” a plant thought to induce abortion. Plants and botanical substances can have toxic effects, and there’s no evidence on whether historical methods to induce abortion were effective or not. The search for silphium In ancient Rome, another plant that was thought to end an unwanted pregnancy (among other uses), was so valued it disappeared — the first recorded extinction in world history, according to archaeologist Lisa Briggs, a research fellow at Cranfield University and a visiting researcher at the British Museum. Silphium, also used to flavor food, was traded across the ancient Roman empire. The city state of Cyrene (in modern-day Libya), the only region where the plant grew, based its whole economy on the plant. It appeared on coins and other artifacts unearthed from the region, Briggs said. “Contemporary authors said it was worth its weight in gold and silver. And so it clearly had a value beyond just its tastiness. I suspect that women’s desire to use it as an abortifacient is one of the reasons the price was driven up,” said Briggs, who is searching for archaeological evidence of the plant, which was turned into a resin, in shipwrecks and museum collections. Pliny the Elder, a Roman author and philosopher who was born around 23 AD, described the plant’s ability to expel an unborn fetus along with other medical uses. It’s impossible to know for sure whether the plant would have had the desired effect, but modern-day studies on related Ferula plants and lab rats showed the plants “exhibit anti-fertility properties in rodents,” Briggs wrote in a paper she coauthored last year. Briggs believes demand for the plant among women may have been a key factor, although not the only reason, for its extinction. The plant was resistant to cultivation, Briggs noted, and climate change and a shift in soil characteristics may also have been factors. Abortionists who were saints It’s sometimes assumed that Christianity has always unequivocally condemned abortion but Maeve Callan, a professor and historian of religion at Simpson College in Iowa, said this misrepresents the past. “People act like there’s only one acceptable attitude towards abortion if you’re Catholic, or if you’re Christian more broadly, or even if you’re religious more broadly. And there’s always been a diversity of viewpoints,” said Callan, the author of the book “Sacred Sisters: Gender, Sanctity, and Power in Medieval Ireland.” Her research, along with other scholars, has uncovered four medieval Irish saints who celebrated ending pregnancy among their miracles, according to medieval manuscripts that described saints’ lives. Typically, these miracles include a nun who has breached her vow to chastity and become pregnant but, through the saint’s intervention, the pregnancy miraculously disappears. The most famous was Saint Brigid, a lesser-known patron saint of Ireland than Patrick, and one whose standing was honored with an inaugural public holiday this year. According to a churchman named Cogitosus, who wrote the first biography of Brigid around 650 AD — some 200 years after her birth — she miraculously ended a woman’s unwanted pregnancy, “causing the fetus to disappear without coming to birth and without pain.” Another saint, Ciarán of Saigir, rescued a nun abducted by a king, according to a biography:  “When the man of God returned to the monastery with the girl, she confessed that she was pregnant. Then the man of God, led by the zeal of justice, not wishing the serpent’s seed to quicken, pressed down on her womb with the sign of the cross and forced her womb to be emptied.” Callan is quick to point out that these Irish saints weren’t champions of choice for women when it came to unwanted pregnancy, nor was it likely that these saints actually performed abortions. “The miracles show people’s attitudes toward abortion and in some circumstances it was seen as acceptable, even as a miraculous blessing.” According to Callan, the Old Irish Penitential, a book that details punishments for sins, the penance for abortion depended on the stage of pregnancy, divided into three, like trimesters: In the first, three and a half years of penance; in the second, seven years; in the third, 14 years. But as Callan put it, “pretty much everything was a sin.” The Old Irish Penitential also stipulates that oral sex merits four or five years’ penance the first time, seven years if it is repeated. “It’s not permissive. Abortion is not okay (according to these teachings). It’s just less of a sin.” The idea that life begins at conception becomes dominant in Catholic teachings only about 150 years ago, according to Callan. Previously, Catholic teachings suggested that a fetus becomes a person some weeks if not months later, once it receives a rational soul — known as “ensoulment.” This often gets associated with “quickening,” when the mother feels the fetus move for the first time, generally in the fifth month of pregnancy. It wasn’t until 1588, that Pope Sixtus V officially classified abortion, regardless of the stage of fetal development, as homicide. However, after Sixtus’s death in 1590, Pope Gregory XIV quickly rolled back the dictate, limiting it to ensouled fetuses. Why the long view is important In research for her upcoming book, Fissell said she had uncovered that “what people dislike about abortion changes immensely over time.” In ancient Rome, for example, abortion was only an issue for elite women, who were thought to be covering up adulterous relationships. In the Renaissance, abortion was linked to witchcraft. For most of history, abortion has not been an issue about the fetus, like it is today, but rather about women’s behavior. “This whole innocent unborn life that is the language of the American right today, that’s only (in recent) decades. Sometimes abortion was something people didn’t like because it pointed to illicit sex. Women have always terminated pregnancies, for as far back in the historical record we can see,” said Fissell.  “I think the long view is really important. Things were not always as they are today.”



Article: 2
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Another state passed a near-total abortion ban. The fight is all over the map
Author: Zachary B. Wolf
Publication_Date: Updated 2:13 AM EDT, Wed September 14, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  — Good luck trying to keep on top of the fight for abortion rights in the US. It’s everywhere, all over the map, and it’s all happening right now. West Virginia passed a near-total abortion ban Tuesday that now heads to the governor. Indiana’s near-total abortion ban will go into effect later this week. It was Republicans filibustering a near-total abortion ban in South Carolina last week. Voters in multiple states across the country will have their say on abortion rights amendments in November. Blue states, meanwhile, are organizing ad campaigns to invite people from outside the state to come there for medical care. California on Tuesday launched a website for this purpose: Abortion.ca.gov.Proposals in Congress that go in opposite directions A GOP proposal, introduced Tuesday by Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, would impose a national abortion ban after 15 weeks of pregnancy, with exceptions for rape or incest or to protect the life of the mother. Graham noted the proposal would put the US in line with many European countries. The big difference is US states would still be able to impose stricter abortion bans like those going into effect in multiple states. Graham’s bill is meant to counter a bipartisan proposal introduced in the Senate last month that would bring back the Roe v. Wade standard of fetal viability.
Republicans who hope to take control of the House and Senate are fearful that the issue could turn public opinion against them and are hoping that Graham’s proposal will offer abortion rights opponents something to support in November. There is a sort of balance here, because neither a proposal to legalize abortion nor one to ban it has much chance of gaining the supermajority of 60 votes needed to become law, since the Senate is beholden to the filibuster. Anger at the Supreme Court for taking away the right American women had for nearly 50 years is more likely to motivate voters in November’s midterm elections. Interactive map: See where abortion is banned – and where it’s still in limbo The immediate fight – and the real maze of access – is at the state level, including with near-total abortion bans West Virginia lawmakers pass abortion ban. The state’s two legislative chambers passed a ban that offers exceptions to victims of rape and incest, but only within eight weeks of pregnancy for adults and 14 weeks for minors, and only if the crimes are reported to law enforcement. A near-total abortion ban goes into effect in Indiana on Thursday. Indiana was the first state in August to pass such a restrictive law since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. Other bans were triggered by the court’s decision. Indiana’s new law includes exceptions for saving the life of the mother and for fatal fetal anomalies up to 20 weeks post-fertilization, and it allows exceptions for pregnancies resulting from rape and incest. A filibuster by Republicans to protect the absolute minimum abortion rights in South Carolina. It was a few Republicans, including all three of the chamber’s female GOP members, who shut down a near-total abortion ban proposal in South Carolina last week. Read the story by CNN’s Veronica Stracqualursi, Andi Babineau and Jon Passantino.
A six-week abortion ban had earlier passed in the state, but is the subject of a court fight, so a 20-week ban is currently in effect there. The CNN report included this quote from a Republican lawmaker in the state who was among the few that blocked the near-total ban pushed by her colleagues: “If you want to believe that God is wanting you to push a bill through with no exception that kills mothers and ruins the lives of children, lets mothers bring home babies to bury them, then I think you’re miscommunicating with God or maybe you’re just not communicating with him at all,” Republican Sen. Katrina Shealy said Wednesday in a fiery speech on the Senate floor directed toward her male colleagues. “I know we disagree on a lot of issues, but hearing you talk about menstrual cycles, conception, how you know when your egg is fertilized or having a baby, I got to tell you it really disgusts me.” A vote is coming in Michigan. Voters will get their say in November. A Michigan state judge threw out a 1931 abortion ban as unconstitutional last week. The state Supreme Court then ordered that a citizen-initiative ballot measure to enshrine abortion rights appear on the ballot there in November. Proposal 3 would establish an “individual right to reproductive freedom, including right to make and carry out all decisions about pregnancy.” Read more from Stracqualursi, who is on top of these developments for CNN. On the ballot in five states. Michigan is not the only state with an abortion rights-related amendment on the ballot in November: California and Vermont will also give voters the option of creating a constitutional right to abortion. Kentucky voters will be asked to clarify the state constitution does not create a right to an abortion (Kansas voters rejected this type of amendment in August). Montana voters will be asked to impose criminal penalties on health care providers who do not act to preserve the life of infants born during the course of an abortion. Read the full rundown on November amendments, again from Stracqualursi. Democrats are banking on the issue to turn out voters in November Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer is one of the many Democrats hoping the issue of abortion rights can help her overcome frustration with the economy and inflation, as CNN’s Dana Bash and Abbie Sharpe found on a trip to the state. It’s a similar story in Pennsylvania, where CNN’s Gregory Krieg found the Democratic Senate candidate John Fetterman trying to appeal to women in the suburbs. “Women are the reason we can win,” Fetterman said. “Don’t piss women off.” Read more on Fetterman’s abortion rights push. Supreme Court underground While the decision to overturn Roe v. Wade redrew the political landscape this year, the court’s conservative bloc has mostly stayed out of view, CNN’s Supreme Court expert Joan Biskupic writes. From her report: There is no ignoring that the public has found it increasingly difficult to think of life-appointed federal judges as neutral decision-makers. Yet the Supreme Court’s conservative majority has largely responded with distance and denial. In the weeks since their contentious late June decisions, the justices have demonstrated a lack of awareness about the public concern and appeared even more disconnected, gravitating to like-minded audiences and speaking at closed venues. She quotes Chief Justice John Roberts from an appearance in Colorado Springs: “If the court doesn’t retain its legitimate function of interpreting the Constitution,” he said. “I’m not sure who would take up that mantle. You don’t want the political branches telling you what the law is, and you don’t want public opinion to be the guide of what the appropriate decision is.” Biskupic adds that Roberts “arguably misses the point that emerges in public responses: that the court appears to be abandoning its constitutional role, in favor of one indistinguishable from the political branches.”



Article: 3
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Myths about abortion and women’s mental health are widespread, experts say
Author: Sandee LaMotte
Publication_Date: Updated 11:12 PM EDT, Mon July 11, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  — It’s an unfounded message experts say is repeated again and again: Having an abortion may damage a woman’s mental health, perhaps for years. “There’s so much misinformation, so many myths about abortion. Abortion will lead to substance abuse, depression, suicidal thoughts; abortion is bad for your health; every woman is going to regret it,” said social psychologist Brenda Major, a distinguished professor emeritus in the department of psychological and brain sciences at the University of California, Santa Barbara. In reality, decades of research has shown “the vast majority of women feel they made the right choice, and they don’t experience regret,” said Major, who led a 2008 American Psychological Association task force exploring the science on abortion and mental health. Women who had an abortion in the first trimester were no more likely to have mental health problems than women who continued with an unplanned pregnancy, the APA review concluded. A large, long-term study, called The Turnaway Study, followed the mental health of nearly 1,000 women in 21 states who wanted and received an abortion and women who wanted but were denied an abortion between 2008 and 2010. The women were interviewed every six months over the next five years. At the end of that time, 99% of the women who had an abortion believed they had made the right decision – in fact relief was the prominent emotion, one analysis noted. Women who received an abortion had similar or lower levels of depression and anxiety than women denied an abortion and were no more likely to experience post-traumatic stress than women who carried their baby to term, according to study results. The research also found no difference in mental health outcomes between a first trimester abortion and having an abortion later in the pregnancy. Sources of misinformation Abortion misinformation might come from friends or family, an article or study read online, or during a mandated pre-abortion counseling session some states put into place during the Roe v. Wade era, experts told CNN. Of the 33 states that have required patients receive counseling before an abortion, eight routinely included the potential for negative psychological responses as part of the conversation, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a nonprofit research and policy organization that focuses on sexual and reproductive rights worldwide. “There are states in which women are told that because they’re having an abortion, they’re at increased risk for depression, suicidal ideation, post traumatic stress disorder and more,” said Julia Steinberg, an associate professor of family science at the University of Maryland’s School of Public Health. “Abortion does not cause depression, it does not cause suicide (or) suicidal ideation. It does not cause substance use. It does not cause anxiety disorders,” said Steinberg, who has studied the mental health impact of abortion for years. In fact, the best predictor of not faring well after an abortion was a “prior history of mental health issues,” Major said. “The best predictor of substance use after an abortion was if you were already a substance abuser, and the best predictor of depression after abortion was if you’ve been depressed before you had one.” Abortion misinformation also comes from published studies in academic journals that conclude abortion does cause mental health problems, experts say. “The studies make it look like there is a debate, but what’s really going on is those studies are very poorly conducted,” Steinberg said. “They are not methodologically rigorous, and they don’t adhere to scientific principles.” The 2008 APA task force published a scathing rebuke of the research quality of many studies which found mental health concerns after abortion. Studies often failed to control for factors such as rape, sexual or partner violence, or a woman’s history of prior mental disorders or substance abuse, the task force said. “We reviewed every legitimate study that had ever been done on this topic,” Major said. “The methodological flaws in so many of the studies that are being cited as showing harm to women’s mental health as a result of having an abortion were just egregious.” A later 2018 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine review analyzed studies on abortion’s impact on future fertility and pregnancy outcomes, risk of breast cancer, mental health disorders, and premature death. “Much of the published literature on these topics fails to meet scientific standards for rigorous, unbiased research,” the report stated, concluding that “having an abortion does not increase a woman’s risk of secondary infertility, pregnancy-related hypertensive disorders, abnormal placentation (after a D&E abortion), preterm birth, breast cancer, or mental health disorders (depression, anxiety, and PTSD).” Yet this belief that abortion harms women’s mental and physical health has been used to justify “waiting period laws, two-trip requirements (in which women have to come back twice) and telling women inaccurate information around medication abortion,” Steinberg said. Being denied an abortion A 2020 study looked at the short- and long-term impact of being denied an abortion. Results showed women who were turned away were more likely to experience significant anxiety and stress. “In my research what we found is that the challenges of getting an abortion – finding a place, traveling, having to disclose your abortion to someone you would have preferred not to – increased symptoms of depression, anxiety and stress,” said study author Antonia Biggs, a social psychologist who is also one of the Turnaway researchers from the Advancing New Standards in Reproductive Health (ANSIRH) project at the University of California, San Francisco. “And then at the time of being denied an abortion, those symptoms go even higher. And then over time, they do dissipate,” said Biggs, an associate professor at UCSF. In the Turnaway study, women denied an abortion who carried their babies to term were “much more likely to experience physical health issues at the time of childbirth, as childbirth is much more risky than having an abortion,” Biggs said. Two of the women in the study died during childbirth. A 2012 study found the risk of death associated with childbirth is approximately 14 times higher than the risk from abortion. After five years, the study found women denied an abortion were more likely to “live in poverty and much more likely to suffer economic hardship, including more bankruptcies, debt and challenges meeting basic living needs,” Biggs said. Women who were turned away were also more likely to be tethered to a violent and abusive partner, and to have chronic health conditions, Biggs said. “They also lowered their aspirations (for the future), and they were less likely to achieve them,” she added. If a woman denied an abortion had existing children under 5, those children were less likely to meet their developmental milestones, more likely to live in poverty, and less likely to have bonded with their mother, the study found. Will these outcomes affect more women now that Roe v. Wade has been overturned? “I’m completely overwhelmed with worry,” Biggs said. “I worry about people being able to get wanted care. Some will have to overcome huge amounts of obstacles in order to access care. “Others will hopefully safely self-manage their abortions by accessing medication abortion pills online, which we know is quite safe,” Biggs said. Before the Supreme Court reversal, over half of all abortions in the US were done via a two-drug prescription medication method, according to the Guttmacher Institute. “Then there are some women whom I worry will use other less safe methods to self-manage the pregnancies or carry to term in a situation that they they deem is not ideal for them,” Biggs said.



Article: 4
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Survey finds widespread confusion around medication abortion in post-Roe US
Author: Deidre McPhillips
Publication_Date: Published 6:13 AM EST, Wed February 1, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  — Nearly half of adults in the United States – including 2 out of 5 women of childbearing age – are unsure whether medication abortion is legal in their state, according to a survey released Wednesday by the Kaiser Family Foundation. The survey was conducted in mid-January, more than six months after the US Supreme Court issued the Dobbs decision that overturned Roe v. Wade and revoked the federal right to abortion. Several states had “trigger bans” that took effect in the weeks after the high court’s judgment, with laws that ban or severely restrict abortion. But some of those laws are in limbo as they face challenges in courts. The legal landscape around abortion was rapidly even before Dobbs, experts say. New telehealth rules put in place during the Covid-19 pandemic offered additional pathways to access medication abortion. State legislatures are now in session for the first time since that decision, which is sure to bring more change. “It’s fair to be confused about all of the different ways in which somebody can get access to medication abortion and wonder which ways are legal and which ways are a little bit more outside of the legal framework,” said Asha Hassan, a researcher with the University of Minnesota’s Center for Antiracism Research for Health Equity who focuses on reproductive health. “We’re in a learning curve right now. But then, the education has to change because it is constantly a shifting climate.” Both in states where abortion is banned and in those where it is legal, about half of adults are not sure about the legal status of medication abortion in their state, according to the KFF survey. And some are getting it wrong. In states where abortion is banned, about 13% of adults incorrectly think that medication abortion is legal. And in states where abortion is legal, about 10% think that medication is banned. This confusion can be a barrier on its own, said Kirsten Moore, director of the Expanding Medication Abortion Access Project. Spreading awareness and battling misinformation is a key priority for the White House and other advocates. For politicians and others who are anti-abortion, “it’s not just about actually passing laws that make it illegal. It’s about creating a perception of danger of risk,” she said. “Even if active steps are not taken, the perception of legal risk can deter people.” President Biden has called for action to specifically protect access to mifepristone, a drug used in medication abortion that is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. In early January, the FDA approved a measure that would allow certain pharmacies to supply the drug directly to patients with a prescription. That expands access, as medication abortion was previously available only through certain health care providers. But it has never been available over-the-counter. Most abortions in the US are medication abortions – as opposed to the medical procedure – according to the Guttmacher Institute, a research and policy organization focused on sexual and reproductive health that supports abortion rights. But there is still some confusion around how to access a medication abortion. About half of adults are not sure whether medication abortion requires a prescription, according to the KFF survey. About 1 in 10 adults incorrectly believe that it does not require a prescription – including nearly as many women. Most adults (62%) know that emergency contraceptive pills, known as the morning after pill or Plan B, are not the same as the abortion pill. And most adults know that contraceptive pills are available in their state, as they are in all 50 states. But nearly three-quarters think emergency contraceptive pills can end a pregnancy in its early stages. “There’s a lot of growth and work that we can do within the health care industry and environment to make sure that people know that [medication abortion] is safe, and something that is extremely accessible compared to surgical abortion right now,” Hassan said.


Article: 5
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Births have increased in states with abortion bans, research finds
Author: Deidre McPhillips
Publication_Date: Published 1:22 PM EST, Tue November 21, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  Nearly a quarter of people seeking an abortion in the United States were unable to get one due to bans that took effect after the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision, researchers estimate. In the first half of 2023, states with abortion bans had an average fertility rate that was 2.3% higher than states where abortion was not restricted, according to the analysis – leading to about 32,000 more births than expected. The findings are based on preliminary births data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The research has not yet been peer-reviewed but experts say the data paints a clear picture about the direct impact of abortion restrictions. “It’s an assault on reproductive autonomy,” said Alison Gemmill, an assistant professor at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. She was not involved in the new analysis, but has published research on the effect that a strict abortion law had on births in Texas. “We don’t always detect signals in these population aggregates because there’s a lot of variation when you group everybody together. The fact that there is a signal at the population level means that something’s really going on. It’s pretty strong evidence.” Fertility rates – the number of births per women of reproductive age – don’t typically change dramatically. A “shock” like Covid-19, for example, led to a “temporary baby bust,” said Gemmill, who has also researched infertility during the pandemic. The 4.5% decrease in fertility rate in the first year of the pandemic was the largest in decades, according to CDC data. Other research has found that the number of abortions increased nationwide in the year following the Dobbs decision, with especially large increases in states that border those with bans. But complete data on the number of abortions provided to people who crossed states lines for their care is not yet available, and the new research suggests that travel remains a significant barrier to access.After the Dobbs decision, fertility rates increased most significantly in states with longer travel times to the nearest abortion providers, the new research found, including a 5.1% increase in Texas and a 4.4% increase in Mississippi. Abortions have been trending up in the US for years. But rising birth rates could indicate that unmet need persists, despite an increase in the number of abortions in the year post-Dobbs. “One might think that those data conflict,” said Ushma Upadhyay, a professor at the University of California, San Francisco’s Bixby Center for Global Reproductive Health. She was not involved in the new analysis, but is co-chair of the #WeCount project that tracks abortion trends. “But in actuality, we’ve known that there are many people who still can’t get abortions.” While some people may have been able to travel out of banned states for an abortion, abortions are likely also increasing among residents of states where it remains legal as additional resources and support help to address unmet need that existed even before Roe v. Wade was overturned, she said. Earlier research has found that there are many consequences of unintended birth, affecting the health and livelihood of the mother, the child and the family in general. And the new research found that abortion bans have especially affected Hispanic women, with a 4.7% increase in fertility rate in the first half of 2023, as well as younger women, with a 3.3% increase among those in their early 20s. “Restricted access to abortion services causes this domino effect,” said Rachel Hardeman, a professor of health and racial equity at the University of Minnesota, who was not involved in the new research. People who do not have the resources to overcome additional barriers, such as costly travel to an out-of-state provider, may then have less opportunity to build long-term financial security. “[The Dobbs decision] has had a profound impact on birthing people’s ability to decide what their family looks like and how they navigate that,” she said. “All of the material resources necessary for a family to not just barely survive, but to thrive in our society are going to be impacted by their ability to access health care, broadly speaking, and abortion care, specifically.” Not all people who seek an abortion have an unwanted pregnancy, experts say. Some are wanted pregnancies with fetal abnormalities or other life-threatening conditions – and some of the increase in births likely includes unviable pregnancies that were carried to term. “Infant mortality is one of these more concrete consequences that we can measure right now, and we are seeing impacts there,” Gemmill said. In Texas, for example, infant mortality increased about 12% in 2022, including a 22% spike in infant deaths caused by severe genetic and birth defects. “I think about these women that had to carry these gestations and give birth to them, knowing that they were likely going to die shortly after birth and the trauma related to that,” Gemmill said. “We’re just going to be learning more and more about the consequences.”


Article: 6
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: How outlawing abortion could worsen America’s maternal mortality crisis
Author: Priya Krishnakumar and Daniel Wolfe
Publication_Date: Updated 11:58 AM EDT, Fri June 24, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  — Dr. Judette Louis recalls a time when she treated a patient who was hemorrhaging from her pregnancy — and how she had to wait to obtain permission before she was allowed to terminate the pregnancy for the health of the mother. “I was standing there watching her hemorrhage out, waiting for permission to do the termination. It is a disgusting feeling. It is a sad feeling. And you’re sitting there literally watching her blood pressure going down while you’re waiting for permission,” the Chair of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the University of South Florida told CNN. “It’s just sad to now know … that that will be happening all over across the country where [terminating a pregnancy] won’t even be a possibility for a lot of states.” Dr. Louis and other health care experts fear that with Roe v. Wade overturned, potential widespread abortion bans will deepen the United States’ maternal mortality crisis.  Health care experts told CNN they worry that reducing access to abortion — by closing clinics, setting early gestational limits or outlawing the procedure altogether — may lead to more pregnancy-related deaths in the United States. Rates of pregnancy-related deaths in the US are the highest in the developed world and have risen steadily over time, with Black women three times more likely to die in pregnancy or childbirth than White women. The CDC recently reported that the rate of pregnancy-related deaths increased from 20.1 in 2019 to 23.8 in 2020, continuing a worrying trend of worsening maternal health outcomes for people in the United States. Now that the Supreme Court has overturned Roe v. Wade, 26 states are poised to ban abortion through pre-existing bans or “trigger laws” that will now go into effect without the landmark ruling is no longer in place. As a result, more than 10 million people of reproductive age would have to cross state lines to access the procedure in the nearest state where it is legal, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a research and policy institute that supports legal abortion rights. “[People] may seek unsafe ways of terminating a pregnancy and could have harmful consequences,” said Whitney Rice, the director of the Center for Reproductive Health Research in the Southeast at Emory University. “You also have people who may sort of be forced to continue pregnancies to term and could have a risk of infant health outcomes that include low birth weight, preterm birth, or may have a risk of maternal mortality.” Maternal mortality rates are already high in those states certain or likely to ban abortion — 47% higher than the national rate, according to a CNN analysis of 2018 data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the most recent available. Maternal mortality rates are higher in states likely to ban abortion In 2018 maternal mortality rates were, on average, 47% higher than the national rate in states the Guttmacher Institute says are certain or likely to ban abortion with Roe v. Wade now overturned. Overall, states with the most restrictive abortion laws had a 7% higher maternal mortality rate than states with fewer restrictions, according to a 2021 study in the American Journal of Public Health. States that restricted abortion based on gestational limits saw a steep rise in the maternal mortality rate by 38%, according to a 2020 study in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine. A 20% reduction in Planned Parenthood clinics in a state between 2007-2015 resulted, on average, in an increase in the state’s maternal mortality rates by 8%. Study: Restricting access to abortion led to increases in mortality rates In the 18 states where Planned Parenthood clinics decreased by 20%, maternal mortality rates increased by 8%. Rates in the 12 states where abortions were restricted by gestational age increased by 38%, according to a 2020 study in the American Journal of Preventative Medicine. Maternal mortality risks are felt unequally Black people are three times more likely to die of pregnancy-related causes than non-Hispanic White and Hispanic people, according to the CDC. With reduced access to abortion and other forms of reproductive healthcare, experts worry that these rates could rise in a post-Roe landscape. Disparities in pregnancy-related deaths widened in 2020 In 2020, the risk of dying during or shortly after pregnancy for Black people increased by 25% and is 2.9 times the rate for White people. The pandemic year also saw a 38% increase in pregnancy-related deaths among Hispanic people. These disparities are rooted in decades of structural disadvantages and well-documented discrimination in medical care, leading to persisting gaps across socioeconomic and educational levels.“[Marginalized groups] really face barriers in every sense of the way,” said Dr. Louis. “They face barriers in terms of getting care in a timely fashion, barriers in being able to see a health care provider, and then barriers to getting the appropriate treatment. And that’s even if they’re offered appropriate treatment.” Access to maternal care is harder to come by in states likely to ban abortion Access to maternal care is also worse in the 26 states that the Guttmacher Institute expects will be certain or likely to ban abortion. More than half of all counties in these states are classified as having low access to maternal care or are maternity-care deserts, according to a CNN analysis of data from the March of Dimes, compared to 39% of counties in states that are not likely to ban abortion if Roe is overturned. Nationwide, approximately 5.1 million women aged 15-44 live in areas with low access to maternal care — or “maternity care deserts,” according to a 2020 report from the March of Dimes, a nonprofit that advocates for better health care outcomes for mothers and babies. The organization defines a maternity care desert as any county where there is no hospital offering obstetric care, no birth center and no obstetric provider. In these counties, people carrying a pregnancy to term may face significant barriers in receiving quality care for both the parent and child. The 2020 average annual median household income for these counties was $49,518, below the national median household income of $67,521.”Those sorts of structural environments tend to go hand in hand,” Rice said. “States with highly restrictive abortion environments also generally have fewer policies supporting health and well being of pregnant people, as well as their children and their families.” Legal abortions are low-risk and safe — but lack of access to the procedure puts women at risk Negative health outcomes from receiving a legal abortion are rare — according to the CDC, the national death rate from 2013-2018 was 0.41 deaths per 100,000 abortions. In 2018, the CDC identified only two patients who died as a result of a legal abortion. The rate of abortion-related fatalities has remained stable over the past several decades, even as maternal mortality rates have crept upwards. But people who seek to terminate their pregnancies and are unable to do so are more likely to face negative health outcomes, according to the Turnaway Study, a multi-year endeavor based at the University of California-San Francisco that tracked the health of people who were — and were not — able to receive a wanted abortion. The study found that women who were denied an abortion and gave birth reported more life-threatening conditions like eclampsia and postpartum hemorrhaging, in addition to higher levels of chronic conditions such as migraines and persistent joint pain, than women who were able to access the abortion. Two of the women in the study who were denied an abortion died from complications related to their pregnancy. Lauren Ralph, an epidemiologist who worked on the study at the University of California-San Francisco, described the deaths as “sobering.” “I think we can say with certainty that those deaths could have been avoided had these people had access to the abortion care that they had sought,” Ralph added. With Roe v. Wade overturned, Ralph and other experts have warned that the maternal mortality rate will likely continue to rise in the United States if pregnant people are unable to access the care they need. “It’s a wake up call that we should stop being so complacent and that we need to look at more proactive strategies,” said Dr. Louis of the medical community’s role in providing safe access to abortion.



Article: 7
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Abortion laws impact people trying to become pregnant, too
Author: Madeline Holcombe
Publication_Date: Published 9:50 AM EDT, Sun July 3, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  — All Sharon McRae and her husband wanted were to be parents, but it took terminating embryos to get there, she said. The Columbia, Maryland, couple were thrilled when she quickly became pregnant, but about nine and a half weeks in, she miscarried. It was devastating, but the doctor said it happens. They tried again. She would have three more consecutive miscarriages, which required a procedure called dilation and curettage, often called a D&C, to remove the tissue, before fertility specialists found the right combination of treatments for her, which included in vitro fertilization. For her fifth pregnancy, McRae and her doctors wanted to increase the odds that she would have a child. They fertilized multiple eggs, selected the four with the best chances of making it to term, and implanted them in hopes of at least one fetus developing successfully, she said. They all took. Four high-risk pregnancy specialists told McRae there was no way she and all four fetuses would survive the pregnancy. They had to selectively abort two of the fetuses to preserve the chances of her and the other two surviving. After all that time and heartbreak, terminating two of the fetuses was one of the hardest things she ever had to go through, but she went through with the procedure. Twenty-three years ago, she gave birth to twin daughters. Three years later, that first in vitro process helped her get pregnant with her son. She would go through it all again to have them, she said. “Had these laws gone into effect (back then and) if I was in a state that was not protected, I would not be a mother or I would be dead,” McRae said. “I would have been prevented possibly from having the D&Cs, possibly penalized for having miscarriages.” McRae was devastated when she learned about the US Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade. She said her daughter now worries that she won’t have the chance to become a mother, knowing how integral abortion was to McRae maintaining and surviving pregnancy. The McRaes aren’t the only ones concerned. Terminating embryos is still often part of treatment for miscarriages, ectopic pregnancies and IVF, all of which are fairly common, said Dr. John Zhang, founder and medical director of New Hope Fertility Center in New York City. A 2015 study found that 1% to 2% of all pregnancies are ectopic. About 2% of babies in the US are born with the assistance of IVF, said Sean Tipton, chief advocacy, policy and development officer for the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. And 10% to 20% of known pregnancies end in miscarriage, according to the Mayo Clinic. The decision from the Supreme Court puts the legality of abortive procedures into the hands of the states which, for both those looking to avoid having a child and those working toward it, “changes the way how people deal with fertility issues and really changes the way doctors practice medicine forever,” Zhang said. Treatment for ectopic pregnancies Lucretia Torva of Phoenix never realized the procedure that once saved her life could be factored into discussions about abortion until the US Supreme Court’s decision overturning Roe. She had gone to see the doctor for some pain, and she learned that not only was she pregnant, but that she was at risk of bleeding out and needed to go to the emergency room for surgery that night. Torva’s pregnancy was ectopic, meaning that the embryo implanted outside of the main cavity of her uterus. A fertilized egg can’t survive an ectopic pregnancy and can result in life-threatening bleeding, according to the Mayo Clinic. Aborting the embryo is often the best treatment for an ectopic pregnancy, Zhang said. The end of Roe v. Wade abortion protection has many people concerned about access to treatments like those, as well as miscarriage treatment and in vitro fertilization, Tipton said. Sometimes, when a pregnant person miscarries, as in the case of Sharon McRae, doctors remove the tissue through D&C. In those cases, as well as following an abortion, the procedure helps prevent infection or excess bleeding, according to the Mayo Clinic. “There is a lot of concern out there that things will be overread dealing with a follow-up from a miscarriage,” Tipton said. Fertilizing more eggs than needed And for people struggling to get pregnant, terminating embryos is a common part of in vitro fertilization, which is often described to patients as a numbers game, Zhang said. The expectant parents often have limited time and finances to go through the process, and so to ensure the highest rate of success, doctors will fertilize more eggs than needed in hopes of implanting the ones with the highest chances of developing into a full-term pregnancy, Zhang said. The rest are either saved for future use or discarded. Depending on how states define the legal status of a fertilized embryo, that process could become more complex, Zhang said. Eroding the doctor-patient relationship Dr. Mary Jacobson, a Palo-Alto, California-based OB-GYN and chief medical adviser at Alpha Medical calls the relationship between a doctor and patient “sacrosanct.” Ideally, it’s a collaborative and personal experience to help find the best care for the person seeking it – but imposing limitations on the decisions the pair can make together can erode that relationship, she said. Torva said she can’t imagine what might have happened to her had her doctor needed to wait for approval or had hesitated over legal questions before treating her ectopic pregnancy. Doctors want to provide the best care for their patients, and if a new doctor were to be trained in a state that bans abortions, they may not have the training or the comfort level to perform a procedure that may be the best treatment for a condition or even a lifesaving measure, Zhang said. “Instead of just thinking ‘what can I do to save a life?’ They are thinking ‘can I do it?’” he said. Making a bad situation worse As it is, going through the process of trying to build a family when miscarriages, ectopic pregnancy and fertility issues are involved is hard enough. Psychologically speaking, the impact of dealing with infertility follows closely behind the experience of cancer, Tipton and Zhang said. Families often withdraw from social circles and put career development on hold, and the experience can have a long-term impact on the relationship between a couple, Zhang said. “The ambiguity of what may or may not be legal and perhaps the reality that the treatment they need will not be available – it just makes an already bad situation worse,” Tipton said. In cases where the pregnant person learns that the pregnancy is not viable, abortive procedures can help relieve some of the pain that comes from carrying a fetus that will never become the child they were planning on, Jacobson said. McRae knows that defeat, emptiness and sorrow, she said. One of her D&Cs couldn’t happen right away, and she had to wait overnight for the tissue to be removed. “I just wanted it over. I knew it was over, but I needed my body to feel like it was over,” she said. “It was just devastating.” There is some hopeful news for families looking to conceive: The details of how abortion laws impact miscarriages are not settled yet, and in almost every state IVF procedures aren’t inhibited yet, Tipton said. “It is a real danger, but it’s not something that people need to panic about today,” he added.


Article: 8
News_Outlet: CNN
Title:Maternal and infant death rates are higher in states that ban or restrict abortion, report says
Author: Jacqueline Howard
Publication_Date: Updated 8:29 AM EST, Fri December 16, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  The rates of mothers and newborn babies dying during pregnancy, at birth or postpartum are much higher in states that currently ban or restrict abortions than in states preserving access, according to a new report. The researchers analyzed data on deaths and other health outcomes using the most recent data available – from 2020 and earlier – and compared rates based on states’ current abortion access policies, as of November, after the Supreme Court decision this summer that overturned Roe v. Wade. States that have restricted access to abortion services had maternal death rates in 2020 that were 62% higher than in states preserving access to abortion services. Between 2018 and 2020, the maternal death rate increased twice as fast in states that now have abortion restrictions, according to the report released Wednesday by the research foundation Commonwealth Fund. Overall, death rates from any cause among women of reproductive age – 15 to 44 – were 34% higher in abortion-restriction states than in abortion-access states, according to the report. The report also says that in 2019, fetal or infant death rates in the first week of life occurred at a 15% higher rate, on average, in states with abortion restrictions than in states with wider abortion access. “Making reproductive services inaccessible to women and families can have dire consequences, and particularly, it varies by state,” said obstetrician/gynecologist Dr. Laurie Zephyrin, a co-author of the report and senior vice president for advancing health equity at the Commonwealth Fund. In June the Supreme Court ruled on Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which overturned Roe v. Wade, holding that there is no longer a federal constitutional right to an abortion and paving the way for states to ban abortions. Based on the findings in the report, Zephyrin thinks maternal death rates in the US could worsen after the Dobbs decision. “More people in the US die from complications of pregnancy and childbirth than any other developed nation, and most are preventable – and our rates are on the rise,” she said. “So I think that’s just very important as we think of this maternal health crisis and this collision of crises with this impact and this Dobbs decision.” Maternal death rates 62% higher in abortion-restriction states The new report – by researchers at Boston University and the Commonwealth Fund – includes data on state-by-state abortion policies and health outcomes among mothers and babies from sources including the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Health Resources and Services Administration and the nonprofit March of Dimes. The researchers compared the health outcomes in 26 abortion-restricting states with those in the remaining 24 states and the District of Columbia, which appear to be unlikely to pass such restrictions. The researchers found that slightly more than half – 55% – of US births in 2020 were in the 26 states currently with abortion bans or restrictions. In those states, births tended to be concentrated among women younger than 30, with 57% in women in that age group. In comparison, in abortion-access states, 45% of births were to women under 30. Maternal mortality rates are higher in states that now restrict abortion In 2018 maternal mortality rates were higher than the national rate in states that have banned or severely restricted abortion access after Roe v. Wade was overturned. The analysis also revealed that 39% of counties in states restricting abortion access fit the criteria to be considered “maternity care deserts,” meaning there is limited or no access to maternity health care services, such as an ob/gyn, hospital or birth center with obstetric care or certified midwives. In comparison, 25% of counties in abortion-access states can be considered maternity care deserts. The researchers noted that a higher number of births in abortion-restriction states are in rural areas, where access to maternity care can be more limited and maternity care deserts more common. Rural areas had 17% of births in abortion-restriction states but 8% in abortion-access states. The report also says that, between 2018 and 2020, the infant and perinatal mortality rates were 6.2 deaths per 1,000 births in abortion-restriction states, compared with 4.8 per 1,000 in abortion-access states. Across all racial and ethnic groups, infant mortality in the first year of life was higher in abortion-restriction states than in abortion-access states. “What’s most surprising is, states have within their power to be able to avoid these outcomes,” Zephyrin said. “States really have it in their power to enhance maternal health capacity, really create the systems that are necessary to ensure that every person has an opportunity for a safe and healthy birth and life, whether we’re talking about recruiting maternity providers, providing more birthing centers, supporting the range of reproductive health services, expanding Medicaid, investing in postpartum Medicaid extension.” Separate research published in 2020 in the journal Women’s Health Issues found that although maternal mortality overall continues to increase in the United States, the maternal death rate in states that have expanded Medicaid has had less of an increase than in non-expansion states. “Compared with their counterparts in other states, women of reproductive age and birthing people in states with current or proposed abortion bans have more limited access to affordable health insurance coverage, worse health outcomes, and lower access to maternity care providers,” Zephyrin and her colleagues wrote in the new Commonwealth Fund report. “Making abortion illegal risks widening these disparities, as states with already limited Medicaid maternity coverage and fewer maternity care resources lose providers who are reluctant to practice in states that they perceive as restricting their practice,” the researchers wrote. “The result is a deepening of fractures in the maternal health system and a compounding of inequities by race, ethnicity, and geography.” ‘This is not how healthcare should be’ Dr. Kristyn Brandi, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Darney-Landy Fellow, said she is not surprised by the findings in the new report because the “issues around reproductive health care are intricately linked.” “My patients that seek abortion care are the same patients that need prenatal care in other pregnancies. Similarly, there is great data that suggests that the places that limit abortion also have higher maternal morbidity rates, less access to insurance, higher teen pregnancy rates, less access to sex education – the maps are overlapping,” Brandi, a practicing ob/gyn who was not involved in the research, wrote in an email to CNN. She adds that restricting abortion care disproportionately affects marginalized communities, such as people with disabilities or travel limitations. “It also means, similar to states that have only one abortion clinic, that the places where there are only one or a few labor and delivery units or prenatal care centers, those facilities will become overwhelmed with patients and that may create delays in care,” Brandi said. “This is not how healthcare should be. People should be able to access all reproductive health care services, regardless of their zip code.”



Article: 9
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: How a medication abortion, also known as an ‘abortion pill,’ works
Author: Sandee LaMotte
Publication_Date: Updated 4:57 AM EDT, Thu May 11, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  — While legal battles over access to mifepristone, one of two drugs used for medication abortions, play out in court, the drug continues to be available in states which consider abortion legal. “While many women obtain medication abortion from a clinic or their OB-GYN, others obtain the pills on their own to self-induce or self-manage their abortion,” said Dr. Daniel Grossman, a professor of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive sciences at the University of California, San Francisco. “A growing body of research indicates that self-managed abortion is safe and effective,” he said. Mifepristone blocks the hormone progesterone, which is needed for a pregnancy to continue. The drug is approved to end a pregnancy through 10 weeks’ gestation, which is “70 days or less since the first day of the last menstrual period,” according to the FDA. In a medication abortion, a second drug, misoprostol, is taken within the next 24 to 48 hours. Misoprostol causes the uterus to contract, creating cramping and bleeding. Approved for use in other conditions, such as preventing stomach ulcers, the drug has been available at pharmacies for decades. Together, the two drugs are commonly known as the “abortion pill,” which is now used in more than half of the abortions in the United States, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a research group that supports abortion rights. “Some people do this because they cannot access a clinic — particularly in states with legal restrictions on abortion — or because they have a preference for self-care,” said Grossman, who is also the director of Advancing New Standards in Reproductive Health, a research group that evaluates the pros and cons of reproductive health policies and publishes studies on how abortion affects a woman’s health. What happens in a medication abortion What happens during a medication abortion? To find out, CNN spoke with Grossman. The conversation has been edited for clarity. CNN: What is the difference between a first-trimester medication abortion and a vacuum aspiration in terms of what a woman experiences? Dr. Daniel Grossman: A vacuum aspiration is most commonly performed under a combination of local anesthetic and oral pain medications or local anesthetic together with intravenous sedation, or what is called conscious sedation. An injection of local anesthetic is given to the area around the cervix, and the cervix is gently dilated or opened up. Once the cervix is opened, a small straw-like tube is inserted into the uterus, and a gentle vacuum is used to remove the pregnancy tissue. Contrary to what some say, if the procedure is done before nine weeks or so, there’s nothing in the tissue that would be recognizable as a part of an embryo. The aspiration procedure takes just a couple of minutes; then the person is observed for one to two hours until any sedation has worn off. We also monitor each patient for very rare complications, such as heavy bleeding. Grossman: A medication abortion is a more prolonged process. After taking the pills, bleeding and cramping can occur over a period of days. Bleeding is typically heaviest when the actual pregnancy is expelled, but that bleeding usually eases within a few hours. On average people continue to have some mild bleeding for about two weeks or so, which is a bit longer than after a vacuum aspiration. Nausea, vomiting, fever, chills, diarrhea and headache can occur after using the abortion pill, and everyone who has a successful medication abortion usually reports some pain. In fact, the pain of medication abortion can be quite intense. In the studies that have looked at it, the average maximum level of pain that people report is about a seven to eight out of 10, with 10 being the highest. However, people also say that the pain can be brief, peaking just as the pregnancy is being expelled. The level of cramping and pain can depend on the length of the pregnancy as well as whether or not someone has given birth before. For example, a medical abortion at six weeks or less gestation typically has less pain and cramping than one performed at nine weeks. People who have given birth generally have less pain. CNN: What can be done to help with the pain of a medication abortion? Grossman: There are definitely things that can be used to help with the pain. Research has shown that ibuprofen is better than acetaminophen for treating the pain of medication abortion. We typically advise people to take 600 milligrams every six hours or so as needed. Some people take tramadol, a narcotic analgesic, or Vicodin, which is a combination of acetaminophen and hydrocodone. Recent research I was involved in found medications like tramadol can be helpful if taken prophylactically before the pain starts. Another successful regimen that we studied combined ibuprofen with a nausea medicine called metoclopramide that also helped with pain. Other than ibuprofen, these medications require a prescription. Another study found that a TENS device, which stands for transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulator, helps with the pain of medication abortion. It works through pads put on the abdomen that stimulate the nerves through mild electrical shocks, thus interfering with the pain signals. That’s something people could get without a prescription. Pain can be an overlooked issue with medication abortion because, quite honestly, as clinicians, we’re not there with patients when they are in their homes going through this. But as we’ve been doing more research on people’s experiences with medication abortion, it’s become quite clear that pain control is really important. I think we need to do a better job of treating the pain and making these options available to patients. CNN: Are there health conditions that make the use of a medication abortion unwise? Grossman: Undergoing a medication abortion can be dangerous if the pregnancy is ectopic, meaning the embryo is developing outside of the uterus. It’s rare, happening in about two out of every 100 pregnancies — and it appears to be even rarer among people seeking medication abortion. People who have undergone previous pelvic, fallopian tube or abdominal surgery are at higher risk of an ectopic pregnancy, as are those with a history of pelvic inflammatory disease. Certain sexually transmitted infections can raise risk, as does smoking, a history of infertility and use of infertility treatments such as in vitro fertilization (IVF). If a person is on anticoagulant or blood thinning drugs or has a bleeding disorder, a medication abortion is not advised. The long-term use of steroids is another contraindication for using the abortion pill. Anyone using an intrauterine device, or IUD, must have it removed before taking mifepristone because it may be partially expelled during the process, which can be painful. People with chronic adrenal failure or who have inherited a rare disorder called porphyria are not good candidates. CNN: Are there any signs of trouble a woman should watch for after undergoing a medication abortion? Grossman: It can be common to have a low-grade fever in the first few hours after taking misoprostol, the second drug in a medication abortion. If someone has a low-grade fever — 100.4 degrees to 101 degrees Fahrenheit — that lasts more than four hours, or has a high fever of over 101 degrees Fahrenheit after taking the medications, they do need to be evaluated by a health care provider. Heavy bleeding, which would be soaking two or more thick full-size pads an hour for two consecutive hours, or a foul-smelling vaginal discharge should be evaluated as well. One of the warning signs of an ectopic pregnancy is severe pelvic pain, particularly on one side of the abdomen. The pain can also radiate to the back. Another sign is getting dizzy or fainting, which could indicate internal bleeding. These are all very rare complications, but it’s wise to be on the lookout.We usually recommend that someone having a medication abortion have someone with them during the first 24 hours after taking misoprostol or until the pregnancy has passed. Many people specifically choose to have a medication abortion because they can be surrounded by a partner, family or friends. Most people know that the abortion is complete because they stop feeling pregnant, and symptoms such as nausea and breast tenderness disappear, usually within a week of passing the pregnancy. A home urine pregnancy test may remain positive even four to five weeks after a successful medication abortion, just because it takes that long for the pregnancy hormone to disappear from the bloodstream. If someone still feels pregnant, isn’t sure if the pregnancy fully passed or has a positive pregnancy test five weeks after taking mifepristone, they need to be evaluated by a clinician. People should know that they can ovulate as soon as two weeks after a medication abortion. Most birth control options can be started immediately after a medication abortion.


Article: 10
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Because of Florida abortion laws, she carried her baby to term knowing he would die
Author: Elizabeth Cohen, Carma Hassan and Amanda Musa
Publication_Date: Updated 10:32 AM EDT, Wed May 3, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  A Florida woman, unable to get an abortion in her state, carried to term a baby who had no kidneys. Deborah Dorbert’s son Milo died in her arms on March 3, shortly after he was born, just as her doctors had predicted he would. “He gasped for air a couple of times when I held him,” said Dorbert, 33. “I watched my child take his first breath, and I held him as he took his last one.” She said her pregnancy was proceeding normally until November, when, at 24 weeks, an ultrasound showed that the fetus did not have kidneys and that she had hardly any amniotic fluid. Not only was the baby sure to die, her doctors told her, but the pregnancy put her at especially high risk of preeclampsia, a potentially deadly complication. Her doctors told her it was too late to terminate the pregnancy in Florida, which bans nearly all abortions after 15 weeks. The only options were to go out of state to get an abortion or to carry the baby to full term, and Dorbert and her husband didn’t have the money to travel. What followed was an agonizing 13 weeks of carrying a baby she knew would die and worrying about her own health. It left Dorbert with severe anxiety and depression for the first time in her life. Florida law allows abortions after 15 weeks if two doctors confirm the diagnosis of a fatal fetal abnormality in writing, but doctors in Florida and states with similar laws have been hesitant to terminate such pregnancies for fear someone will question whether the abnormality was truly fatal. The penalties for violating the law are severe: Doctors can go to prison and face heavy fines and legal fees. CNN reached out to Florida state Reps. Erin Grall and Jenna Persons-Mulicka, who co-sponsored the state’s 15-week ban, for comment on Dorbert’s situation. Grall did not respond. Persons-Mulicka sent a statement. “The intent of the law is quite clear. We are providing mothers with the resources they need to raise healthy children, empowering doctors to help their patients make informed decisions, and shifting the conversation to valuing life,” she wrote. Last month, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis signed into law an even more restrictive measure that would ban most abortions in the state after six weeks, with an exception for fatal fetal abnormalities. The law won’t go into effect until the state Supreme Court overturns its precedent on abortion or tosses out a case challenging state abortion restrictions. Doctors scramble to figure out abortion laws Deborah met Lee in 2014 while they were working at Publix in Lakeland, Florida, where she was a clerk and he was a team leader in the grocery department. They married three years later, and their son Kaiden was born a year after that. Last year, the couple was thrilled when they found out they were going to have a second child. On the day before Thanksgiving, when she was 23 weeks pregnant, Dorbert brought Kaiden to an ultrasound appointment. The 4-year-old was enthralled, looking at the screen and following along with the ultrasound technician as she pointed out the baby’s features. “He’d go, ‘yeah, there’s the eye’ or ‘there’s the hand,’ ” Dorbert remembered. “He was excited that he could see the baby on the monitor.” But abruptly, the technician stopped pointing at the screen and left the room to get the obstetrician. Her obstetrician’s ultrasound report that day shows a grim diagnosis: There was no right kidney, and it was unclear whether there was a left kidney. In addition, the baby had too little amniotic fluid, and the heart was swollen. The obstetrician referred Dorbert to a high-risk pregnancy expert. Because of the holiday, it took a week before the Dorberts could get in to see the specialist. They said a more detailed ultrasound at that appointment showed that the baby had no kidneys at all and that the lungs were under-developed. The condition is called Potter syndrome, and the specialist said it was ” ‘incompatible with life,’ ” Deborah remembers. She says the doctor told her the baby would be stillborn or would die within minutes, or at most hours, after birth. In this situation, doctors in states that allow abortions routinely give parents two options, according to Dr. Erika Werner, chair of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Tufts Medical Center and a spokesperson for the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine. One is to induce birth and, if the baby is born alive, offer comfort care until death. The other is to carry the baby to full term. The Dorberts told the specialist that they wanted to induce birth, terminating the pregnancy, to spare the baby, themselves and their older son from suffering. They said the doctor agreed that this was a sound decision. Dorbert says the doctor told her that in all the cases he’d seen, “that was always the outcome – someone’s baby went stillborn – and the ones that did deliver, the babies pass shortly after birth.” But the doctor said he would need to check with his administration because of the Florida law that had gone into effect a few months before, banning most abortions after 15 weeks. The law makes an exception if “two physicians certify in writing that, in reasonable medical judgment, the fetus has a fatal fetal abnormality,” which the law defines as “a terminal condition that, in reasonable medical judgment, regardless of the provision of life-saving medical treatment, is incompatible with life outside the womb and will result in death upon birth or imminently thereafter.” About a month passed without a decision. Finally, Dorbert’s obstetrician informed her that she wouldn’t terminate the pregnancy. By this point, Dorbert was 27 weeks along. Dr. Stephanie Ros, a high-risk pregnancy expert in Tampa and a spokesperson for the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, said she’s not surprised that the doctor was unwilling to do the termination, considering that the law does not spell out exactly what would be considered a “terminal condition.”  “With health care, there are very few black-and-whites. There are so many things that are a little bit nuanced,” she said. “The moment the law came out, I think everyone was scrambling to try to figure out what exactly that language intended to convey.” If a doctor is convicted of running afoul of the law, the penalties are severe: up to five years in prison and $5,000 in fines, not to mention steep legal fees. Ros, an associate professor at the University of South Florida, said that after the law was passed, she and colleagues at Florida academic medical centers wrote a list of conditions they considered fatal fetal abnormalities. Renal agenesis – the absence of kidneys – was on the list. For that reason, she said, she would feel comfortable terminating a pregnancy with a fetus with this condition, but she “absolutely understands” why doctors who aren’t at academic medical centers, such as Dorbert’s obstetrician, would refuse. “It’s tricky because of how this law was written in the first place,” she said. A ‘medical marvel’ In Dorbert’s situation, part of that trickiness has to do with the pregnancy 10 years ago of a woman she’s never met.
In 2012, Jaime Herrera Beutler, then a Republican US congresswoman from Washington state, found out she was pregnant with a baby who, like Dorbert’s, had Potter syndrome. The condition affects more than just the kidneys. Functioning kidneys produce amniotic fluid, which a fetus “breathes” into their lungs, and if there’s not enough of it, the lungs don’t develop properly. In the womb, the baby can live with underdeveloped lungs because the placenta provides oxygen. But after birth, the baby is on their own. During her pregnancy, Herrera Beutler and her husband, Dan, heard the baby’s heartbeat on an ultrasound. “That’s pretty convincing. We know she’s still alive,” Dan Beutler told CNN in 2017. “We had this gut feeling of ‘there has to be something.’ ” The couple sought out an experimental treatment at Johns Hopkins Medicine in which doctors transfused saline solution into the uterus to help mimic amniotic fluid. After a series of weekly infusions, their daughter, Abigail, was born 12 weeks prematurely. She survived on dialysis until she was big enough for a kidney transplant from her father. In a 2019 essay in the Wall Street Journal, Herrera Beutler wrote that Abigail was a “healthy, happy big sister.” “Through divine intervention and some courageous doctors we now have Abigail in our lives,” she wrote. Herrera Beutler, now a strategic adviser to the Children’s Hospital Association, did not respond to requests for comment on this story. Abigail’s parents have said she is the first baby without kidneys to survive childbirth. A 2014 Hopkins news release called Abigail’s survival “a medical marvel.” A study on babies with Potter syndrome In 2017, Hopkins and several other academic medical centers started a clinical trial to see how well the saline treatment worked. In the study, 18 pregnant women whose fetuses did not have kidneys received uterine saline infusions. They went to the researchers one to three times a week, and each time, the doctors inserted a needle into their uterus for the procedure, which could take up to an hour. They made these visits for about 11 weeks. Four of those 18 children are still alive, according to Dr. Jena Miller, an assistant professor at the Johns Hopkins Center for Fetal Therapy and co-principal investigator of the study. One baby was stillborn, and the other 17 were born prematurely and alive. Of those 17 babies, 14 survived to 2 weeks of age. Over the next two years, eight of those 14 children died without ever leaving the hospital. The remaining six babies spent an average of about six months in the hospital and then went home. Two later died; the other four are on dialysis. None has received a kidney transplant. Miller presented preliminary results from the study at a February meeting of the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine. The research has not been peer-reviewed or published in a professional journal. She noted that in the study, even when babies did survive, they are “medically complex and have required multiple surgeries.” “You’re subjecting parents to a very medically complex child, and for some families, they’re happy. They’re OK with doing that,” she said. “The family that chooses that, they’re all in for that. But it’s their choice to make. There are absolutely families that just do not have the resources or the capacity for that journey. They would not choose that journey for themselves or their child.” A YouTube video raises funds for the Dorberts By the time the Dorberts got the news that her doctors wouldn’t terminate Deborah’s pregnancy, she was 27 weeks along. As the baby grew, Dorbert started having terrible pain in her ribs and back, much worse than anything she’d experienced during her pregnancy with Kaiden. She says her obstetrician explained that without cushioning from the amniotic fluid, the baby had a more direct impact on her body. Dorbert says they didn’t have the money to travel out of state to get an abortion. By this time, they’d left their jobs at Publix; she was doing Instacart deliveries, and Lee was working at an insurance company. A few weeks later, at 31 weeks pregnant, she had a regular visit with her longtime family physician, Dr. David Berger. She told him about how carrying a baby she knew would die had taken a terrible toll. “I just got very depressed, and the anxiety was horrible. I just didn’t want to get out of bed most days. I would just break down crying,” Dorbert told CNN. “[I] just didn’t want to do anything but sit on the couch and cry. “I continued to feel this baby move,” she added, “knowing that I’m going to give birth and watch my child pass.” Having to stay pregnant hurt not just her, she said, but also her husband and son. “I really stepped back as a mom because I struggled,” she said. “He’s a 4-year-old boy, he wants to have fun, he wants to play, and he wants his mother to play with him.” But instead, she told Kaiden to watch TV as she lay on the couch. Lee Dorbert said it was “painful for me to watch” his wife suffer, as there was “nothing I could really do besides just being there for her.” Furious about what his patient was experiencing, with Deborah’s permission, Berger published videos on YouTube and TikTok on January 26 and more TikTok videos on February 2 and February 24. “This brings me so much sorrow to see that a couple – or anybody – would have to go through something like this. In all honesty, it makes me embarrassed to be a Floridian,” Berger said in the YouTube video. Viewers offered the Dorberts money to travel out of state to terminate the pregnancy. But the couple worried that they would get arrested. Florida law doesn’t forbid such travel, but the Dorberts were concerned. “The thing that scared us [was] we didn’t know if we’d go to jail. We didn’t know if we’d be fined. We still had another son. We couldn’t have anything happen to us, because we have another child,” Deborah said. As the weeks passed, Kaiden watched his mother’s belly grow. At first somewhat indifferent to having a sibling, he began to warm up to the idea. “As we continued to see my belly grow, he knew there was a baby in there,” she said. As he saw and felt the baby move, “he was getting excited. He’s like, ‘there’s a baby in your tummy!’ ” Kaiden was so looking forward to meeting his little sister – they didn’t know the sex at the time, but he assumed it would be a girl – that he urged his mother to “just spit the baby out.” In his mind, he and the baby were already a team, and so when his parents urged him to pick up his toys or eat his vegetables or take a bath, he would say, “my sister told me I don’t have to do that.” Unsure of what to tell Kaiden, the Dorberts consulted a therapist and decided it would easier on their son if they waited until just before the baby was born to let him know his sibling wasn’t coming home. On February 18, a few weeks before she delivered, the Washington Post published a story about the Dorberts. Deborah said it elicited one “hateful” letter, but she took some comfort from many “heartwarming” emails the Washington Post reporter forwarded her from readers who sent “their love and kindness.” ‘He passed away in my arms’ Once she got to 37 weeks, Dorbert’s obstetrician told her they could induce labor. The night before delivery, they told Kaiden that the baby had died, and he broke down crying. The next day, after birth, Milo “looked more on the blue side. He gasped for air, and you could tell he was really trying hard to breathe,” Dorbert remembers. His parents and Deborah’s parents cuddled him for 94 minutes before he took his last breath. They were “making sure he felt loved, and he wasn’t in pain, even though I knew he was in pain,” Deborah said. Lee sang to Milo “Three Little Birds” by Bob Marley & The Wailers and read him the book “I’ll Love You Forever” about a polar bear cub – Kaiden’s favorite story. “He didn’t open his eyes at all when we held him, and he passed away in my arms,” Deborah said. Milo’s tiny hand- and footprints were taken and memorialized inside the front cover of the book. She said she knows it would have been emotionally wrenching if the pregnancy had been terminated when her baby’s birth defect was first spotted, at 24 weeks. But being forced to carry the baby for 13 more weeks, knowing that he would die, made it even more horrific. Those 13 weeks are what led to the anxiety and depression and debilitating back pain, she said, making it harder on her, Lee and Kaiden. It was during those 13 weeks that Kaiden got so excited to have a new sibling, only to have that joy taken away. She still suffers emotionally and physically from those 13 weeks, and it took a toll on her marriage. She and Lee are now in marriage counseling. “We’re making small steps, but it’s going to take time,” she said. Deborah is angry at the politicians whom she blames for forcing them to experience those gut-wrenching 13 weeks. “I think they need to leave it up to the doctors to treat each and every one of their patients the way they need to be treated,” she said. “I don’t think politicians have a place [in] health care. That’s why we have doctors.” Her physicians have reassured her that she’s not at higher risk of having another child with Potter syndrome. Her husband and son want another child, Deborah said, but at this point, she doesn’t. “I can’t go through another trauma like this pregnancy,” she said. “I felt the baby the whole time.”

Article: 11
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Pence says he supports banning abortions for nonviable pregnancies
Author: Veronica Stracqualursi
Publication_Date: Updated 3:55 PM EDT, Thu July 13, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  Former Vice President Mike Pence said abortion should be banned when a pregnancy is not viable, according to the Associated Press. “I’m pro-life. I don’t apologize for it,” Pence told the AP in a recent interview. “I just have heard so many stories over the years of courageous women and families who were told that their unborn child would not go to term or would not survive. And then they had a healthy pregnancy and a healthy delivery.” A Pence adviser told CNN that the former vice president’s position still allows for exceptions for life of the mother. Pence strongly opposes abortion and has been perhaps the most outspoken Republican candidate about the issue as many of his GOP rivals have avoided staking out a clear position on abortion.
During a CNN town hall in Iowa last month, Pence said he supports a federal abortion ban including exceptions for rape, incest, and life of the mother. He also backs federal legislation limiting the procedure and has called on other 2024 GOP candidates to support a 15-week national abortion ban. Pence told CNN’s Wolf Blitzer back in March that he would support legislation restricting abortion to six weeks of pregnancy. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis signed a bill into law in his state that banned abortion at six weeks while President Donald Trump has suggested the legislation was “too harsh.” Clinicians use ultrasound results and measure pregnancy hormone levels in order to determine “whether a pregnancy is viable beyond the first trimester,” according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Pregnancies that are deemed unviable regardless of gestational age include tubal ectopic pregnancies and early pregnancy loss, according to the ACOG, which can be deadly for the pregnant person. There are cases, such as “genetic or isolated structural abnormalities in which essential structures do not develop properly,” in which survivability is poor and patients may choose to end their pregnancies or give birth with palliative care options, the ACOG notes. Since Roe v. Wade was overturned last year, several women have shared their harrowing stories of trying to obtain medically necessary abortions in states that have greatly restricted the procedure. One Texas woman told CNN’s Elizabeth Cohen that she nearly died after her water broke four months into her pregnancy, putting her at high risk for a life-threatening infection. Doctors in Texas had to wait until the woman was sick enough so they felt legally safe to terminate her pregnancy and then bring her to the ICU after she started developing symptoms of sepsis. A Christian conservative, Pence views the “cause of life” as “the calling of our time.” “As your President, I will always stand for the sanctity of life and I will not rest and I will not relent until we restore the sanctity of life to the center of American law in every state in the land,” he said in his presidential campaign announcement last month. Pence has called for more support and resources for women in crisis pregnancies and advocated for adoption as alternatives to abortion.




Article: 12
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: The abortion access map is being dramatically redrawn this week
Author: Zachary B. Wolf
Publication_Date: Updated 2:13 AM EDT, Wed September 14, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  The evolving patchwork of access to abortion care is going through big changes this week, with the entire Southeast on the brink of imposing new limits. Bands of states restricting abortion access could soon extend the entire length of the country, depending on legislative action and pending court battles. Major developments this week Republican lawmakers in North Carolina overrode their Democratic governor’s veto, moving to ban most abortions after 12 weeks of pregnancy. Under current state law, abortions are legal up to 20 weeks of pregnancy. The new law, which takes effect July 1, also imposes new requirements for medication abortion, which now accounts for the vast majority of US abortions and is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration to be conducted up to 10 weeks of pregnancy. North Carolina Republicans got the supermajority they needed when a Democrat who had previously supported abortion rights, state Rep. Tricia Cotham, changed parties. In South Carolina, a total abortion ban was blocked earlier this year by a bloc of female lawmakers, including several Republicans. But this week, the legislature is on pace to restrict abortion after six weeks. The bill is known as the “Fetal Heartbeat and Protection from Abortion Act,” and would ban most abortions after early cardiac activity can be detected in a fetus or embryo. Such activity can commonly be detected as early as six weeks into pregnancy, before many women know they are pregnant, according to CNN’s report.South Carolina state Sen. Penry Gustafson, who helped defeat the total abortion ban, told CNN’s Christiane Amanpour this month that she considers herself to be “pro-life,” but that neither she nor most South Carolinians support a total ban. “The Republican consensus is that we do need restrictions,” Gustafson said. “There’s a range of that between zero weeks and 12 weeks.” She supports a six-week ban in South Carolina and opposes a federal abortion ban. In Nebraska’s unicameral and nonpartisan legislature, after lawmakers earlier this year failed to impose a six-week ban, they voted this week to include a 12-week abortion ban in a bill to ban transgender health care for minors. Nationally, the legality of medication abortion has been challenged and an appeals court hearing Wednesday in New Orleans will set the stage for how the case is ultimately brought to the Supreme Court, which has kept the drug mifepristone available for now. The actions in the Carolinas – assuming the six-week ban ultimately passes in South Carolina – mean that the entire Southeast, from North Carolina over to Oklahoma, and from Florida east to Texas, will have restricted access to abortion care far beyond what was available under Roe v. Wade. More restrictions pending
The restrictions continue to the north in Kentucky, where voters last November rejected placing anti-abortion rights language in the state’s constitution, but legislators have so far left in place a near-total abortion ban during an ensuing court fight. The abortion restriction zone could soon extend further north to include Indiana, Ohio and Iowa, where legislatures have passed more restrictive laws but abortion rights remain in limbo during court fights. In Ohio, voters could get two chances to make their feelings known. In August, Republican lawmakers want to ask voters to decide whether to make it more difficult to change the state’s constitution. In November, abortion rights activists want to ask voters to change the state’s constitution to guarantee abortion rights. Read more about developments in Ohio. Related: These bans may feel arbitrary to women facing difficulty in pregnancy. CNN reported back in February about an Ohio couple who agonized over how to deal with an unborn child who had organs outside her body – state law there allows for abortions up to 22 weeks of pregnancy. In Florida, Republicans who control the state government have also passed legislation to restrict abortion access to six weeks of pregnancy, beyond the current restriction of 15 weeks – but again, there is ongoing litigation. Where voters have spoken In Kansas, like Kentucky, voters last year rejected the idea of amending the state constitution to say that a right to abortion is not guaranteed. That trend carried into the midterm elections in 2022, when voters in red and blue states either moved to protect abortion rights in their state constitutions or reject proposals to further restrict them.




Article: 13
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: One of the last women to get a legal abortion in Arizona tells her story
Author: Kyung Lah and Anna-Maja Rappard
Publication_Date: Updated 10:52 PM EDT, Mon September 26, 2022
Article_Content: Tucson, Arizona CNN  —  Her feet dangle off the exam table, anxiously swinging back and forth. The doctor will arrive soon for the ultrasound. The woman will see the first image of the baby growing inside of her – one she will never hold. The ultrasound doesn’t take long, and the image is unmistakable. “You can see the head and the little nose,” says the woman, pointing at the ultrasound picture. She asks the doctor if she can keep the image. “I want the picture because although I am deciding and taking this option, I still wanted to see my little baby,” she says. That option is an abortion. She will have the termination at the Planned Parenthood clinic in Tucson, Arizona, where she was just examined. First, there is a state-mandated 24-hour wait. As she sits, ultrasound picture in her hand, she chooses to tell her story to CNN. “I want to make peace with this,” she says, grieving for the child who will never be born. Her decision has nothing to do with politics. But caught up in all the emotions roiling through her is her reaction to the national political debate about reproductive rights and who should decide what is best. “I am very angry. Very,” she emphasizes. “All I see is a group of people – men, mostly – making a decision for all of us women when they have not one idea what it is like to be in our shoes.” She spoke to CNN just days before a Pima County judge ruled Friday that a ban from 1901, before Arizona was even a state, should be allowed to come into force. The 121-year-old law, which allows abortion only to save the life of the mother, is one of the measures coming back into effect since this summer’s Dobbs decision by the US Supreme Court overturning Roe vs. Wade. The woman, whose identity CNN is withholding for her privacy and her safety, says she may not show you her face, but she wants you to hear her story. “If we speak up more, maybe our voices will be heard. Just maybe.” Living for her children The woman in the clinic is 23 and lives with her partner and their two young sons. Her first pregnancy was physically challenging, from dehydration to extreme abdominal pain. But she says the second pregnancy nearly killed her. “I was screaming in pain,” the woman recalls of carrying her younger child, her voice breaking into a sob as she explains rushing to the hospital when she was five months pregnant. “They weren’t sure if my placenta was abrupting. I had IVs hooked up to me, breathing machines.” The doctors ran multiple tests, she explains, but they couldn’t understand why she was bleeding and continuing to have contractions. What then? I keep this baby and I lose my life? And I can’t be there for my other two sons? The woman, considering what could happen without an abortion One time, she was in the hospital for 23 days. One moment during that stay continues to haunt her. “Paperwork,” she remembers, “to sign to decide whether I save my life or my son’s life.” She wanted the comfort of her partner or her mother, but her second pregnancy was during the height of the coronavirus pandemic and hospital protocols meant she was utterly alone. “At 37 weeks, I’m in the hospital, bleeding, scared and alone, without my mother, without my family because of Covid. I’m getting ready to have a premature baby. He makes it. He comes out alive, thank God,” she recalls, tears streaming down her face. Her second child feels like a miracle – healthy despite the physical difficulty of the pregnancy. And they are a family, two working parents raising their babies. About 10 weeks ago, the birth control failed between the woman and her partner. A few weeks later, an at-home test showed she was pregnant. If things were different, she might have chosen to add to her family, she says. “If this baby didn’t come with all the complications and everything that it does, then yes,” she says. But the overwhelming thought was the moment the last time when faced with the paperwork about whose life takes precedence in an emergency. “What then? I keep this baby and I lose my life? And I can’t be there for my other two sons?” she recalls thinking. She called Planned Parenthood in Tucson, but it was closed. A new law was set to come into effect with a 15-week restriction on abortions in Arizona but with the state’s attorney general calling for the reinstatement of the 1901 ban, abortion services were halted amid widespread confusion, leaving women caught in the middle. It feels like you’re alone, like you’re being given only one option by a man who doesn’t know half of the struggles that us women go through The woman, on changes to Arizona law after the Dobbs decision “I am running around crazy, feeling like I’m alone,” the woman in the clinic told CNN of that time and how she panicked. “I’m, I’m … just lost. I don’t know who to talk to, what to do. I am scared, terrified that something’s going to happen – that I’m going to have to go through another painful pregnancy where they cannot tell me what’s wrong.” She says she called a clinic in New Mexico, then California, looking for a place to get a procedure or even a checkup. She scrambled to get an appointment and make childcare plans to allow her to get help across state lines, all the while watching time tick away. “It is constant fear. It feels like you’re alone, like you’re being given only one option by a man who doesn’t know half of the struggles that us women go through,” she says. “It is very, very frightening.” Back to the hospital Then, nine weeks pregnant and still trying to get to California, the woman felt stabbing pain in her abdomen. “I had to go to the hospital in an ambulance,” she explains. Doctors connected her to an EKG and an IV for dehydration. They took blood and urine to test and gave her an MRI. “They still couldn’t find anything wrong,” the woman said. “There are no abnormalities with my fetus. It’s unexplainable. I can’t keep water or food down.” She went home, with the same lack of answers from her previous pregnancy. At the end of August, Planned Parenthood in Tucson began offering abortion services again while the court cases continued.
With her California travel still not sorted, the pregnant woman booked an appointment. As she arrived at the clinic, the noise was deafening. “Jesus, let your kingdom come” lyrics blared on a speaker as a half dozen protesters stood on the sidewalk, urging the patients to come talk to them. “Turn from your sin!” a protester yelled. The woman did her best to ignore them. “They do have their own right to an opinion as we should have our own right to ours. But we shouldn’t have to feel like we’re murderers or that we don’t have this right,” she says of the demonstrators. “I think it’s so hypocritical because they don’t know what some of us go through. It really does hurt my soul.” She admits she has not been the most politically engaged person in the past, but the upheaval over abortion in Arizona has changed that. “Our stories do matter. We do matter. I feel that people like Blake Masters need to know that,” she says, citing the Republican candidate who is challenging US Sen. Mark Kelly, a Democrat. After running in his primary as “100% pro-life,” Masters has been modifying his public stance online. He has not commented on the Pima County court decision. Kelly is running as a supporter of abortion rights. In November, says the woman, “More women should take a stand. For this to just be thrown on us because some politician thinks that it’s OK? I don’t think it’s OK at all and I don’t think it’s fair.” The woman carefully places the ultrasound image into her purse and gets up to leave. The next time she comes back to the Tucson clinic, she will be among the last in Arizona to get a safe and legal abortion. Arizona’s abortion ban would go into effect just days later.




Article: 14
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: These male politicians are pushing for women who receive abortions to be punished with prison time
Author: Blake Ellis and Melanie Hicken
Publication_Date: Updated 12:33 AM EDT, Wed September 21, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  A businessman turned state representative from rural Oil City, Louisiana, and a Baptist pastor banded together earlier this year on a radical mission. They were adamant that a woman who receives an abortion should receive the same criminal consequences as one who drowns her baby. Under a bill they promoted, pregnant people could face murder charges even if they were raped or doctors determined the procedure was needed to save their own life. Doctors who attempted to help patients conceive through in-vitro fertilization, a fertility treatment used by millions of Americans, could also be locked up for destroying embryos, and certain contraception such as Plan B would be banned. “The taking of a life is murder, and it is illegal,” state Rep. Danny McCormick told a committee of state lawmakers who considered the bill in May, right after the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade was leaked. “No compromises, no more waiting,” Brian Gunter, the pastor who suggested McCormick be the one to introduce the legislation, told the committee. Only four people spoke against the bill during the committee meeting— all women. They pleaded with the lawmakers to grasp the gravity of the proposed restrictions, which went farther than any state abortion law currently on the books, and warned of unintended consequences. “We need to take a deep breath,” said Melissa Flournoy, a former state representative who runs the progressive advocacy group 10,000 Women Louisiana. She said the bill would only punish women and that there wasn’t enough responsibility being placed on men. But in the end, only one man and one woman, an Independent and a Democrat, voted against it in committee. Seven men on the committee, all Republicans, voted in favor of the bill, moving it one step closer to becoming law. Men at the helm A faction of self-proclaimed “abolitionists” are seeking to make abortion laws more restrictive and the consequences of having the procedure more punitive than ever before. Emboldened by the overturning of Roe v. Wade, they say they will not be satisfied until fetuses are given the same protections as all US citizens — meaning that if abortion is illegal, then criminal statutes should be applied accordingly. While major national anti-abortion groups say they do not support criminalizing women, the idea is gaining traction with certain conservative lawmakers. And the activists and politicians leading the charge are nearly always men, CNN found. This year, three male lawmakers from Indiana attempted to wipe out existing abortion regulations and change the state’s criminal statutes to apply at the time of fertilization. In Texas, five male lawmakers authored a bill last year that would have made getting an abortion punishable by the death penalty if it had gone into law. A state representative in Arizona introduced legislation that included homicide charges — saying in a Facebook video that anyone who undergoes an abortion deserves to “spend some time” in the Arizona “penal system.” And a male Kansas lawmaker proposed a bill that would amend the state’s constitution to allow abortion laws to pass without an exception for the life of the mother. While most in the anti-abortion movement believe that human life begins at conception, “abolitionists” are particularly uncompromising in how they act on their beliefs — comparing abortion to the Holocaust and using inflammatory terms such as “slaughter” and “murder” to describe a medical procedure that most Americans believe should be legal in all or most cases. Bradley Pierce, the attorney who helped draft the Louisiana bill, said his organization has been involved with many of the “abolition” bills that have been introduced in more than a dozen states. All of this proposed legislation would make it possible for women seeking abortions to face criminal charges. An overwhelming majority of Americans said in a Pew Research Center poll they don’t believe men should have a greater say on abortion policy, but that is what is happening. Experts told CNN that the male dominance fits within the anti-abortion movement’s current framing as being focused on “fetal personhood” and “fetal rights” as opposed to maternal rights. Eric Swank, an Arizona State University professor who has studied gender differences in anti-abortion activists, said his research found that while men aren’t necessarily more likely to consider themselves to be “pro-life” than women, they “are more willing to take the adamant stance of no abortion under any conditions.” The most restrictive bills, which don’t include explicit “life of the mother” exceptions and would charge those who receive abortions with homicide, have failed to make it to the full vote needed for passage. But others that prohibit abortions even in cases of rape and incest have taken hold in around a dozen states, including Missouri, Alabama and Tennessee, according to Guttmacher Institute. Those laws, CNN found, were also overwhelmingly passed into law by male legislators. While female Republicans almost always voted in favor of the legislation, gender imbalances within state legislatures, as well as the fact that female lawmakers were more likely to be Democrats, fueled the voting gap. And male Democratic lawmakers were far more likely than female Democrats to cross the aisle to vote in favor of the abortion bans, according to CNN’s analysis. The Texas Heartbeat Act, for example, outlawed nearly all abortions in the state when it criminalized the procedure as soon as a heartbeat could be detected — as early as six weeks of pregnancy. While men made up nearly three quarters of the 177 lawmakers who voted, nearly 90% of those who voted in favor of the bill were men. Encouraging ‘sacrificial behavior’ Scott Herndon, a bearded Idaho man and father of eight, once believed abortion was an issue that should be discussed “between a woman and her physician.” He remembers watching the classic 80s movie, “Fast Times at Ridgemont High,” and being relatively ambivalent about the fact that one of the characters received an abortion. He didn’t become a Christian until 1996, the same year he drove his pregnant girlfriend along the streets of San Francisco on his motorcycle. The pregnancy was unexpected, but that life development, along with a newfound religious practice, led Herndon to spend a lot of thinking about “the miraculous nature of life.” Over the years he began to feel compelled to get involved with the anti-abortion movement. His daughter is now 25, and he and his wife went on to have seven more children. A longtime member of the Idaho Republicans, he told CNN he decided to run for state Senate this year with a mission of fighting government encroachment. Herndon, who touts his competitive shooting experience in high school and college, is a staunch supporter of the right to bear arms and strongly opposes vaccine mandates. He describes himself as a “true family-values conservative,” noting that his sons help him with his home-building business while his five daughters live on the family farm, milking cows, and raising chickens and pigs. One of his longterm goals if elected, he said, is to abolish abortion in the state. “Success depends on changing hearts and minds,” he said. “I liken the effort to Martin Luther King Jr.’s civil rights movement for desegregation and equal treatment of African Americans.” This comparison is one that abortion rights activists take serious issue with. “Let’s be clear: appropriating the word ‘abolition’ is particularly contemptuous,” a spokesperson for Planned Parenthood Federation of America said in a statement to CNN. “That word is a symbol of freedom and this group wants to put people behind bars for exercising their right to bodily autonomy.” Herndon, however, says women should embrace their instinctual “sacrificial behavior.” “If a mother is in a life raft with a child and there’s only enough food and water to save one, I’m guessing most mothers would not throw their child overboard and drown them,” he said in an interview with CNN when asked about medical circumstances where a doctor may deem an abortion necessary to save a woman’s life, such as a cancer diagnosis that requires aggressive treatment. As part of their efforts to abolish abortion, which is generally defined as the termination of a pregnancy, Herndon and others in the anti-abortion movement are attempting to redefine the term to the “intentional killing” of a fetus. That way, they claim, the lives of mothers could still be saved as long as doctors make an equal attempt to save the fetus. Gunter, meanwhile, said he disagrees with the medical establishment and does not believe abortion is ever medically necessary. Medical and legal experts told CNN this is a dangerous and inaccurate claim, saying there are plenty of situations that could result in women dying or being put through unnecessary bodily harm if explicit exceptions for the health and life of the mother are not included in the laws regulating abortion. Louise King, a gynecologic surgeon and professor at Harvard Medical School, said the claims are “disingenuous at best and intentional dissemination of misinformation at worst” and questioned why they “can’t simply trust medical professionals to do their job.” “Most of these ‘arguments’ are attempts to impose a minority religious view on the majority of our citizens,” she said. “This is not a matter of belief or opinion. This is a highly inappropriate way to use our legislative system.”  An immediate abortion may be needed if a pregnant person’s water breaks before 20 weeks, King said, or when patients have pre-existing conditions that could lead to heart or liver failure or they need aggressive treatment for a disease like cancer that would severely harm — if not destroy — the fetus. An “equal attempt to save the fetus” would require putting the life of the pregnant person at risk,” she said, adding that it is also not the well established standard of care. Doctors also note that abortion bans take away a patient’s ability to make decisions about their own health and pregnancy, sometimes forcing them to endure pregnancies and deliveries of fetuses that will not survive. Stories like this are already making headlines as laws become increasingly restrictive. In some cases, doctors are already afraid to perform abortions in cases where a mother’s health is at risk, even with so called “life of the mother” exceptions in place. In Texas, one woman learned that her baby had heart, lung, brain, kidney and genetic defects and would either be stillborn or die within minutes of birth. At the same time, doctors warned her that carrying the baby to term threatened her own life, but she says she was still refused an abortion by doctors who said it could run afoul of the state’s strict six-week abortion ban. She ultimately drove 10 hours to a New Mexico abortion clinic to undergo the procedure. “I’m still so angry and hurt about it that I can hardly see straight,” she wrote on Facebook the next day. Another Texas woman spoke out about being forced to carry her dead fetus for weeks after suffering a miscarriage. In Louisiana, a woman carrying a fetus without a skull was reportedly not allowed to get an abortion, while another was reportedly denied an abortion and instead forced into hours of labor when her water broke at 16 weeks, long before the fetus was viable. Herndon agreed that the health of the pregnant woman should be considered, but he worries that the medical community automatically prioritizes the mother’s life and does not treat the fetus as a person until birth, saying this needs to change. And he said that while locking up women is not his objective, it only makes sense for homicide charges to apply to a woman who chooses to undergo an abortion if fetuses are given equal protections under the law. As chair of his county’s Republican Party, he attended the Idaho Republican convention in July and proposed an official change to the party platform in support of an amendment to the state constitution that would “strengthen” the rights of fetuses. After it easily passed the vote, a fellow Republican delegate took the floor with a proposal that was not met with the same support. She wanted to make sure an exception was included in the party platform for abortions needed for a woman’s physical and mental health, Herndon recounted. A heated debate ensued, with Herndon describing the proposal as not carefully crafted and unnecessary. The proposal was ultimately rejected by a margin of nearly 3 to 1, according to news reports. The Idaho Republican Party did not respond to requests for comment. No exceptions Back in 2019, a bill that would criminalize abortion even in cases of rape and incest was placed in front of Alabama’s legislature — a move so extreme that a number of high-profile Republicans initially said it went too far. When the bill reached the state Senate, 25 male legislators voted on party lines to enact it, and the state’s female governor signed it into law. A federal judge blocked it from taking effect, but it had an immediate domino effect as other states followed suit. Most of the laws, including near-total abortion bans known as “trigger” laws and six-week “heartbeat” bills, weren’t able to take effect at the time either, but they are being implemented across the country now that Roe v. Wade has been overturned. This wave of unprecedented restrictions shows the power of the anti-abortion movement and how the Republican Party has shifted to appeal to a small but fervent group of voters, experts said. “The idea that a fully human life with full moral worth begins at conception is not an extreme view in the pro-life movement,” said Ziad Munson, a sociology professor at Lehigh University who has researched the movements on both sides of the abortion debate. “The real issue is the degree of power the movement has over the Republican Party in the political arena, where such viewpoints have – at least until recently – been outside the mainstream.” And in recent years, a particular brand of Republican candidate has become more prominent — one that touts the “Big Lie” that the 2020 election was stolen, doesn’t trust science and consider themselves to be Christian Nationalists, said Mary Ziegler, a law professor at the University of California, Davis. “Even a more moderate candidate may feel that they have to toe the line in what the anti-abortion movement is saying, and what (the movement) wants is changing,” said Ziegler, who has studied the anti-abortion movement’s influence on US politics. “So who you are catering to if you’re the Republican Party is changing.” As a result, she said, what would have previously been considered a disqualifying stance on abortion for most voters is one of the issues now being used by a growing number of Republican candidates for state and federal office in the hopes of securing their party’s nomination. During the primary season earlier this year, two of the leading Republican candidates for governor of Pennsylvania said in a debate that they support banning abortion under any circumstances, including if the mother’s life is at risk. “I don’t give way to exceptions,” said Doug Mastriano, who will be on the ticket in November to succeed incumbent Democratic governor Tom Wolf, who has vetoed a number of abortion bans passed by the Republican-controlled state legislature. Men running for a number of statewide offices in Georgia have also vocalized their support of total abortion bans. “There’s no exception in my mind,” former football star Herschel Walker, a Republican who is running for the US Senate, told reporters. Mastriano and Walker have not expressed support for prosecuting women who have abortions. They did not respond to CNN’s requests for comment. While an overwhelming majority of Americans support legalized abortion when a woman’s life or health is at risk, Ziegler said the disappearing “life of the mother” exception stems from a deep distrust of both women, science and the medical establishment. The new focus on punishing women for undergoing abortions — as seen in several bills recently proposed — is also only likely to intensify, she said. As abortion providers close up shop in states with bans, it is going to become increasingly difficult to charge doctors if women travel to other states for the procedure. “That’s going to make it more appealing to punish women,” Ziegler said. ‘Abolitionist, not pro-life’ For pastor Gunter in Lousiana, the “pro-life establishment” is not taking a hard enough stand against abortion. He told CNN he doesn’t think someone can be truly “pro-life” while also believing that abortion is acceptable in certain circumstances. He said he will support nothing short of an all-out abortion ban with homicide charges and that unlike some of his peers, he refuses to sacrifice his principles for political reasons. Gunter, who “grew up in church in diapers” and is now in his 30s, said in a recent speech that he once believed that opposing abortion simply meant voting for “pro-life” candidates. But when a seminary professor invited him and other men to spread the gospel outside an abortion clinic in 2008, he said everything changed. That day, he said he watched 15 women go inside the clinic and “murder their children.” One of them, Gunter said, couldn’t have been older than 13 and he believed she was being forced to undergo the procedure by her mother. “She’s a child, and her mother pulled her into that clinic,” said Gunter. “That day changed my life. I went home, and I was newly married… (my wife) was pregnant with our first child. I’d been seeing ultrasound pictures of my son and I thought to myself ‘My God, someone killed a child just like my son, same age as my son, looks like my son. How can they do that?” After that, he says he began confronting women as they entered abortion clinics every week. And in an attempt to create more sweeping change, he decided to get involved politically. He said he approached Rep. McCormick, who did not respond to CNN’s requests for comment, earlier this year about the Louisiana bill that ended up making waves across the country. It even sparked outrage from the largest anti-abortion group in the state — one that Gunter said he had worked for but recently parted ways with because he felt it wasn’t doing enough to outlaw abortion. Gunter’s impassioned plea at the committee hearing in May was met with applause, and the vote in favor of moving the bill to the full House ultimately came down to a group of state lawmakers that included a former law enforcement officer, a criminal defense and personal injury attorney and an entrepreneur who makes a living designing “man caves” and selling game room furniture. Lawmakers then gathered on the House floor to debate the bill while dozens of supporters gathered outside the chambers in what resembled a church service, reciting Bible passages and swaying together while singing hymns such as “Amazing Grace.” Jeff Durbin, an Arizona-based pastor and head of a Christian production company Apologia Studios, which has more than 300,000 subscribers on YouTube, emceed and live-streamed the event. Durbin, who once played Michelangelo and Donatello in the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise and became fervently religious after overdosing on ecstasy, is now “unapologetically seeking to criminalize and eliminate all forms of abortion without exception.” He did not respond to requests for comment. He and five other men addressed the crowd at the state capitol, citing proverbs and describing women who get abortions as murderers. “We have… a righteous bill that punishes those who choose to murder their children,” T. Russell Hunter, the founder of anti-abortion group Free the States, yelled into the microphone, saying that any truly “pro-life” law should hold pregnant women accountable for their decisions — not just the medical providers. “Abortionists do not wake up and go out into the culture looking for children to kill; mothers bring their babies to them to be murdered. They are guilty…they have murdered their children under the color of law and the Lord God hates it.” Hunter’s group describes itself as “abolitionist, not pro-life” — echoing Gunter’s argument that many in the movement are compromising on their values. “While many who call themselves pro-life agree with us that abortion is murder,” Free the States writes on its website, “abortion has not been opposed by the pro-life political establishment in a manner consistent with its being murder.” Hunter told CNN this movement is not “about wanting to punish women or something silly like that,” and that anyone involved in the decision to terminate a pregnancy should face criminal charges — including fathers. “Pray for the legislators here,” Durbin, who also runs End Abortion Now, said at the capitol rally. But this time, the prayers went unfulfilled. Inside the House chamber, one of seven men to initially vote in favor of the proposed legislation, Rep. Alan Seabaugh, a Republican who describes himself as “pro-life,” apologized for his vote. He said he believed the bill was unconstitutional, “makes criminals out of women.” Other Republican lawmakers and anti-abortion advocates in the state also came out hard against the bill, saying it went too far — including a state representative who said her grandson wouldn’t exist if it weren’t for in vitro fertilization (IVF). The bill never went to a full vote. It was the first time such an extreme anti-abortion measure made it out of any state committee, however, and the vocal opposition has not deterred Gunter. He plans to work with McCormick, the Louisiana lawmaker, to introduce a similar bill next year. Momentum, he told CNN, is only building in the wake of the Supreme Court’s recent decision.



Article: 15
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: FDA expresses concern about providers who offer abortion medications before pregnancy, reports say
Author: Jen Christensen
Publication_Date: Published 8:31 PM EDT, Tue November 1, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  Although health-care providers are not authorized to offer a medication abortion before a patient gets pregnant, some are doing so, a spokesperson for the US Food and Drug Administration told Politico. The FDA is concerned that the practice could be dangerous. Medication abortion, also known as medical abortion, is a method by which someone ends their pregnancy by taking two pills, rather than having a surgical procedure. The first pill is mifepristone, sold under the brand names Mifeprex (formerly RU 486) or Korlym. The second pill is misoprostol. Medication abortion now accounts for more than half of all US abortions, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a research and policy organization focused on sexual and reproductive health. When mifepristone was approved by the FDA in 2000, it was restricted for use only to end a pregnancy 10 weeks or less after the first day of the person’s last menstrual period. The FDA told Politico that it was concerned that providers who gave medication for an abortion before they were pregnant wouldn’t be able to properly oversee their patient’s care, including telling how far along the pregnancy is or whether it’s inside the uterus (intrauterine) or outside the uterus (ectopic). Mifepristone’s labeling says it should not be used in cases of ectopic pregnancy. The FDA did not have a direct response to the report when CNN asked for comment. “They’re not acknowledging people’s ability to understand their own bodies and know what’s right for them,” said Ushma Upadhyay, a professor in the Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Science in the University of California, San Francisco’s Bixby Center for Global Reproductive Health. The FDA’s concern about provider oversight is not based on evidence, Upadhyay said. Some studies she’s worked on have found that people are generally capable of determining how far along they are in their pregnancy. Several other studies have also shown that self-management – proceeding without direct medical supervision – with this kind of medication is safe and effective. “Patients should also be trusted to know when it is appropriate for them and when it is not to seek help from a provider,” Upadhyay said. The FDA relaxed certain federal regulations around medication abortion during the Covid-19 pandemic. Since 2011, mifepristone has been the subject of a type of restricted program the FDA uses to make sure the benefit of certain drugs outweighs any risk. There are 62 drugs in these programs, including some medications to treat cancer or MS, antipsychotics, opioids and testosterone. These medicines usually have some kind of contraindications, and the program requires a provider to be certified to administer them. For some, the provider must follow a specific plan to educate the patient about how the drug works. In December, the FDA allowed medication abortion pills to be sent by mail and said it would no longer enforce a rule that required people to get the first of the two pills in person at a clinic or hospital. Organizations like Choix, a California-based telehealth organization for reproductive and sexual health, have been prescribing mifepristone to people who aren’t pregnant as a way to expand access and to give the patient the power to access care when they need it with the support they deserve, Choix CEO Cindy Adam said.
“Providing abortion care via telehealth, including advance provision, allows us to decrease the multitude of barriers to care that patients face and provides patients peace of mind,” Adam said in an email to CNN. “For some people, the time between finding out they’re pregnant and receiving abortion pills in the mail can be extremely stressful, and presents a range of challenges related to privacy, logistics, finances, their health, and more.” Someone who uses Choix is counseled on what precautions they need to take when they get the medicine and screened for risk factors like a previous ectopic pregnancy, abdominal surgery or sexually transmitted infection, Adam said. They’re told to seek additional care if they become pregnant and get a referral for in-person care if they need it. “We’re also proud to offer ongoing, supportive abortion care from our providers as part of our advance provision service to support patients throughout the process,” she said. Politico said the FDA would not comment on whether it is considering any changes to its restrictions or if it planned to enforce its regulations by fining doctors or companies that prescribe mifepristone in a way that is not approved. “Providers are fully able to prescribe medications off-label, and in fact, some prescribe mifepristone up to 12 weeks” into a pregnancy, Upadhyay said.“Providers should be able to prescribe this medication as they see fit. This is very safe, very effective.” Given the current political climate and the significantly restricted access to abortion in the US, Upadhyay said the FDA needs to take more of a public health approach to abortion to make sure people are able to access these medications. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has called for the FDA to remove access issues to medication abortion, although the organization has no policy on advanced prescription of these drugs. “I think that oftentimes, people think that just because the FDA says something means that it’s right,” said Dr. Jen Villavicencio, the organization’s lead for equity transformation. “They are not infallible.” Villavicencio said “excellent data” shows that the extra steps providers must take are “really inappropriate” based on the safety profile of the drugs. To prescribe the abortion medication, providers have to be certified, and the patient must sign paperwork that says they understand that there is a risk of complications. These steps serve as a barrier to access, she said, rather than enhancing safety. “There have been more deaths related to ibuprofen and Tylenol, which are over-the-counter and able to be bought by anybody. There are more deaths related to those over the 22 years since mifepristone has been approved by the FDA that have been attributed to mifepristone or medication abortion,” Villavicencio said. “That is not evidence-based,” she added. “Mifepristone is one of the safest medications that somebody can take.”



Article: 16
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Supreme Court abortion bombshell suggests a staggering change in American life
Author:Stephen Collinson
Publication_Date: Updated 10:01 AM EDT, Tue May 3, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  A draft Supreme Court opinion suggesting the conservative majority may be about to outlaw the constitutional right to an abortion hit like a political lightning bolt Monday night. The draft opinion, obtained and authenticated by Politico, heralds what would be a massive victory for the conservative movement decades in the making. It set off immediate condemnation and calls for action from leading liberal and medical groups and Democratic leaders, as well as protests outside the Supreme Court building. The bombshell concerns a draft majority opinion, written by conservative Justice Samuel Alito, that slammed the landmark 1973 Roe v. Wade decision enshrining the right to an abortion as wrongly decided. It was circulated in early February, according to Politico, but the final opinion isn’t expected to be published until late June. Votes and language can change before opinions are formally released. CNN has not independently confirmed the document’s authenticity. A Supreme Court spokesperson declined to comment to CNN. But if the high court follows through on such a decision in the coming weeks, it would engineer a massive shift in American life and law – and provide a startling sign of just how fundamentally the conservative majority, solidified by former President Donald Trump, will change society in the decades to come. It would potentially cast into doubt all kinds of precedents and past court rulings that have been regarded as settled law for years. A staggering change in American life If the final decision is issued along the lines of Alito’s draft, millions of American women could have a fundamental right, which many have known all of their lives, taken away. But millions of people who believe that life begins at conception would celebrate such a ruling. There will be weeks of debate about the legal reasoning and implications behind Alito’s draft opinion. But in practice, such a ruling would seem likely to send the issue back to the states. That might mean abortion would be quickly banned by state legislatures in Republican-run states but remain legal in Democratic-run states. Such a scenario would further drive a schism between two halves of the country, which has been exacerbated by increasingly polarized politics in recent years. The emergence of the draft is also stunning in itself. It represents a major and likely unprecedented breach in court confidentiality that is almost certain to worsen the politicization of the court, which has been dragged deeper into partisanship since it decided the 2000 election in favor of George W. Bush over then-Vice President Al Gore and has only accelerated ever since. The draft also opened an unexpected new dimension to the midterm election campaign. The drama could stoke turnout in November for both parties. For now, it validates the decision of social conservatives to stick with Trump after he vowed to nominate justices that would overturn the constitutional right to abortion despite reservations about his moral conduct. And if the court issues such an opinion, it would mean the ex-President’s political legacy could endure potentially for decades. Such a ruling would reignite Democratic fury at then-Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s refusal to confirm then-President Barack Obama’s Supreme Court pick, Merrick Garland, in 2016. Four years later, the GOP leader ignored his own rule prohibiting confirmations in an election year when he rushed through Trump’s pick, Amy Coney Barrett, days before the November contest. How the final ruling could influence the midterms There is a possibility, however, that a final ruling to overturn Roe v. Wade – rather than a slower process of outlawing abortion with a more incremental set of decisions over time – could galvanize Democratic turnout, especially from women, in an election in which the party was girding for heavy losses. A CNN poll conducted by SSRS in January showed, for instance, that 69% of Americans opposed overturning Roe while 30% supported such a move. CNN legal analyst and Supreme Court biographer Joan Biskupic reported late Monday that Chief Justice John Roberts did not want to completely overturn Roe, meaning he would have dissented from part of Alito’s draft opinion, likely with the top bench’s three liberals. That would still give the conservatives a 5-4 majority on the issue. Roberts is willing, however, to uphold the Mississippi law that would ban abortion at 15 weeks of pregnancy, CNN has learned. Under current law, government cannot interfere with a woman’s choice to terminate a pregnancy before about 23 weeks, when a fetus could live outside the womb. Democrats demand action, conservatives celebrate Democrats were quick to react to the Politico report, with many senators, or would-be senators, zeroing in on the filibuster. As the reverberations from the story rocked Washington on Tuesday morning, President Joe Biden issued a written statement that began with the caveat that it was unknown whether the draft was genuine and represented the final decision of the court. But he recalled that his administration had argued before the justices that Roe v. Wade was based on a long line of precedent. “I believe that a woman’s right to choose is fundamental,” Biden wrote. “Roe has been the law of the land for almost fifty years, and basic fairness and the stability of our law demand that it not be overturned.” Late Monday, and in order to try to protect the right to an abortion legislatively, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders called on Democratic leaders to eliminate the requirement for major legislation to achieve a super majority of 60 votes to pass. “Congress must pass legislation that codifies Roe v. Wade as the law of the land in this country NOW,” Sanders wrote, calling for the ending of the filibuster if needed. But the limitations of the 50-50 majority in the Senate mean that it is unlikely the party could pass such legislation on a simple majority. That’s because moderate Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia opposes abortion rights. And Kyrsten Sinema, the Democratic senator from Arizona, who has been a roadblock on other administration priorities, opposes changing the filibuster rules. The Politico report set off an immediate political firestorm. “This is a five alarm fire,” said Washington Sen. Patty Murray, who is part of the Democratic leadership. “In a matter of days or weeks, the horrifying reality is that we could live in a country without Roe. If this is true, women will be forced to remain pregnant no matter their personal circumstances. Extreme politicians will control patients’ most personal decisions. And extreme Republicans will have eliminated a fundamental right an entire generation of women have known their whole lives,” she continued. Rep. Gregory Meeks, a Democrat from New York, told CNN’s Don Lemon that the ruling, if issued in line with the draft, would be a “game changer for America.” “It’s a game changer for women and women’s rights,” he said. There was also swift reaction from the American Civil Liberties Union, whose executive director Anthony Romero warned that such a decision would “deprive half the nation of a fundamental, constitutional right that has been enjoyed by millions of women” for decades. Any decision by the court to send the issue of abortion back to the states would put immediate pressure on governors and legislatures on both sides of the aisle. California Democratic Gov. Gavin Newsom issued a statement Monday night calling the draft opinion an “appalling attack on the rights of women across this country and if it stands, it will destroy lives and put countless women in danger.” But South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem, a possible Republican presidential candidate in 2024, pledged to spring into action immediately if the Supreme Court ruling eventually follows the draft’s reasoning. “If this report is true and Roe v. Wade is overturned, I will immediately call for a special session to save lives and guarantee that every unborn child has a right to life in South Dakota,” Noem tweeted. And there was already a sense of triumph evident in conservative circles about the Politico report. GOP Rep. Lisa McClain of Michigan tweeted that she is praying that “the Supreme Court makes it official and formally overturns this attack on the unborn.” Rep. Madison Cawthorn of North Carolina praised Trump’s role in building the unassailable conservative majority on the court. “Because of Donald J. Trump, Roe v. Wade will be overturned,” Cawthorn tweeted. Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia, a hardline Trump backer, called the draft opinion “the most significant and glorious news of our lifetime. Outside the Court itself, meanwhile, the chants underscored the division on the issue. “Hey, hey, ho, ho, Samuel Alito’s gotta go,” erupted from abortion rights advocates. “Hey hey, ho ho, Roe v. Wade has got to go,” others countered.



Article: 17
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Abortion to be put further out of reach for millions of women as slate of ‘trigger bans’ take effect
Author: Veronica Stracqualursi and Tierney Sneed
Publication_Date: Updated 7:34 PM EDT, Thu August 25, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  A slate of restrictive state abortion laws, including so-called trigger laws, are set to take effect this week, putting access to abortion further out of reach for millions of women as Republican-led states rush to limit the procedure since the Supreme Court’s reversal of Roe v. Wade. Trigger laws in three states – Idaho, Tennessee and Texas – will take effect Thursday, banning abortions in their respective states with few exceptions, though litigation continues around certain aspects of some of those states’ bans. These laws were designed to take effect 30 days following the US Supreme Court’s transmission of its judgment overturning Roe v. Wade – a procedural step by the court that occurred on July 26. On Saturday, an Oklahoma law enacting higher criminal penalties for performing illegal abortions takes effect, adding to the state’s already tough laws prohibiting the procedure. For about 9.9 million women of reproductive age (15-49) in these five states, access to abortion will be impacted by these laws, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a research and policy organization focused on sexual and reproductive health that supports abortion rights. With these laws in place, nearly one-third of US states will have restrictions or a near-total ban on abortion, according to abortion rights groups. Before Thursday, abortion was already effectively banned in Texas, with clinics ceasing abortions as result of two Texas laws that could open them up to civil suits. Texas’ trigger law, passed in 2021, makes abortions illegal unless the pregnant woman is at risk of death or “substantial impairment of a major bodily function.” It does not provide exceptions in cases of rape or incest. Abortions up to six weeks of pregnancy had been available in Tennessee, but the law going into effect on Thursday bans abortions at all stages of pregnancy, except when necessary to prevent the pregnant woman’s death or serious risk of “substantial and irreversible impairment” of a bodily function. Like Texas, Tennessee would also not allow for abortions in cases of rape or incest. Idaho had also recently outlawed abortions after fetal cardiac activity is detected, which can occur around six weeks into pregnancy. Idaho’s trigger law prohibits performing abortions unless necessary to prevent the death of the pregnant woman, or in situations of rape or incest that have been reported to law enforcement. A federal judge issued a preliminary order Wednesday blocking enforcement of Idaho’s ban in certain medical emergencies, granting a request from the Biden administration, which had argued that Idaho’s ban opened doctors up to prosecution for abortion care they were obligated to offer under federal law. The Idaho decision came a day after a dueling decision in a Texas case that concerned how that state’s abortion ban interacted with federal law setting standards for emergency room care. The Biden administration has argued that the federal law – known as the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act or EMTALA – obligates doctors to offer abortion care to patients who are facing the threat of death or other serious health risks because of a pregnancy. A federal judge in Texas late Tuesday pushed back on that interpretation, granting a request from Texas and a national organization that the judge block the administration from using the law to require that providers offer abortion care for emergency patients in the face of a state ban on the procedure. In Idaho, the judge agreed with the Justice Department arguments that EMTALA preempted state abortion bans when those bans would criminalize procedures for medical emergencies contemplated by the federal law. Both cases could be appealed, setting up the possibility that the Supreme Court may be asked in the coming weeks to weigh in on the reach of the federal law and whether it preempts state abortion bans in emergency care situations. Additionally, organizations that offer financial and logistical assistance to people seeking abortions filed a federal lawsuit this week in Texas asking for the court to block the enforcement of its trigger ban and other bans on abortion for conduct that happens out of state. North Dakota’s trigger law that bans abortions in most circumstances was set to take effect on Friday, but a state judge on Thursday issued a preliminary injunction, blocking the ban. Judge Bruce Romanick, of the South Central Judicial District in Burleigh County, said he was issuing the preliminary injunction to maintain the status quo in the state, while the challenge to the law brought by Red River Women’s Clinic, the state’s sole abortion clinic, unfolded in court. The state currently allows abortion up until 20 weeks or more post-fertilization. North Dakota’s abortion ban, approved in 2007, would make it a felony to perform an abortion in the state with exceptions for the life of the mother or in cases of rape or incest.


Article: 18
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: How the Supreme Court ruling could affect insurance coverage for abortions
Author: Tami Luhby
Publication_Date: Published 7:00 AM EDT, Wed June 29, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  — Though a growing number of companies are offering to help workers travel to states where abortion is legal, it remains uncertain whether employers and insurers will have to pull back on providing abortion coverage to residents of states where the procedure is or will soon be banned. Now that the Supreme Court has overturned Roe v. Wade, much will rest on what laws states put in place – particularly those governing their residents’ ability to obtain abortions in other states and to be prescribed medication abortions, experts say. “It would depend upon the legal language,” said Doniella Pliss, a director on the health insurance ratings team at AM Best, a credit rating agency. “For an insurance company, that is not an ideological issue. … They will go strictly by what the law is.” Another important element is whether employers offer self-insured coverage, which is governed by federal regulation, or fully insured policies, which must comply with state rules. In the former, companies pay their workers’ health care costs, while in the latter, they contract with state-licensed insurers to cover the claims. Many large employers are self-insured. Current rules Health insurance coverage of abortion has long faced many limitations. Some 34 states and the District of Columbia allow Medicaid to cover abortions only in cases of rape, incest or endangerment of the woman’s life because of the Hyde Amendment, which restricts federal funding of the procedure, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. The remaining 16 states use their own money to provide broader Medicaid coverage of abortion. Some 26 states prohibit policies sold on their Affordable Care Act exchanges from covering abortion, with certain exceptions. When it comes to job-based plans, 11 states have laws that bar abortion benefits, with certain exceptions, in small business and large employer policies that the states regulate. Some states may allow abortion coverage to be purchased as a rider, according to Kaiser. Seven states have laws that require all of their fully insured employer plans, as well as Obamacare and other individual market policies, to provide abortion benefits.The federal law that regulates self-insured plans, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, known as ERISA, does not contain any abortion coverage limitations or requirements. But the federal Pregnancy Discrimination Act requires all employers that offer health insurance and have 15 or more workers to cover abortion if the woman’s life is at risk. Fallout from the Supreme Court decision About 10 states have effectively banned abortion since Friday’s Supreme Court ruling. And 26 states are certain or likely to prohibit the procedure, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a research and policy organization that supports abortion rights. No state currently bars its residents from obtaining abortions in other states where it is legal. But Republican lawmakers in Missouri have tried to include it in legislation – unsuccessfully, so far. Other states may follow suit, experts say. The liberal Supreme Court justices warned of this potential in their dissent, though Justice Brett Kavanaugh tried to tamp down those worries in his concurring opinion, saying states can’t bar their residents from traveling elsewhere for abortions. Also of potential concern to insurers and employers are state laws that could hold liable those who aid and abet an abortion – which is a provision in the Texas abortion law that was passed last year. This could potentially affect abortion coverage across state lines. “Is coverage considered aiding?” said Alina Salganicoff, Kaiser’s director of women’s health policy. “Insurers are really going to have to look at that.” Many insurers and employers will be “cautious,” she said. “There’s a lot of activity right now, trying to figure this out.” Already, Citigroup and Lyft have drawn the ire of some GOP lawmakers in Texas for providing travel benefits for abortion procedures. One Republican state representative in Texas said earlier this year that he will introduce legislation barring local governments from doing business with any company that provides abortion coverage or pays abortion-related expenses. It’s also possible that ERISA would not preempt certain state laws, such as criminal laws. Another question will be whether states can bar coverage of medication abortions for their residents in self-insured employer plans, said Katy Johnson, senior counsel for health policy at the American Benefits Council, a trade association for primarily large employers. “This is really a novel situation here,” she said, noting that many of the council’s members offer abortion benefits. “Seems like nothing’s off the table.” So far, Johnson has not heard of any employers pulling back on their abortion coverage, including across state lines. And a slew of companies have already declared that they will pay for out-of-state abortions and travel services. But that doesn’t mean they won’t face blowback in states that are banning the procedure. “I would expect some states to take some pretty broad interpretations of the kind of behavior that their own laws cover,” Johnson said.



Article: 19
News_Outlet: CNN
Title:Abortion coverage is limited or unavailable at a quarter of large workplaces
Author: Rachana Pradhan
Publication_Date: Published 6:31 AM EDT, Mon October 23, 2023
Article_Content:  KFF Health News  —  About a quarter of large U.S. employers heavily restrict coverage of legal abortions or don’t cover them at all under health plans for their workers, according to the latest employer health benefits survey by KFF. The findings demonstrate another realm, beyond state laws, in which access to abortion care varies widely across America since the Supreme Court overturned the constitutional right to abortion last year in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. More than ever, where someone works and the constraints of their health insurance can determine whether an abortion is possible. Workers without coverage are left to pay out-of-pocket for abortion care and related costs. In 2021, the median costs for people paying out-of-pocket in the first trimester were $568 for a medication abortion and $625 for an abortion procedure, according to a report from Advancing New Standards in Reproductive Health at the University of California-San Francisco. By the second trimester, the cost increased to $775 for abortion procedures. KFF’s 2023 annual survey found that 10% of large employers — defined as those with at least 200 workers — don’t cover legal abortion care under their largest job-based health plan. An additional 18% said legal abortions are covered only in limited circumstances, such as when a pregnancy is the result of rape or incest, or endangers a person’s life or health. The share of employers that said they don’t cover abortion under any circumstances “is bigger than I would have expected,” said Matthew Rae, an associate director at KFF who helped conduct the survey. So far, 14 states, mostly in the South and Midwest, have enacted near-total abortion bans, and an additional seven states have instituted gestational limits between six and 18 weeks. Abortion is legal in 24 states and the District of Columbia. Sharply divergent state abortion laws solidified in the aftermath of the Dobbs decision compound the complexity for employers with workers across multiple states, Rae said. Many large companies employ people in places with vastly different abortion policies, and their health benefits are more likely to cover dependents who may live elsewhere. “Those dependents can be college kids — and college kids can be anywhere — or any other type of dependent who could just spread out over an area much larger than where you just have actual physical establishments,” Rae said. The KFF survey found that about a third of large companies said they cover legal abortions in most or all circumstances; the largest companies, with at least 5,000 employees, were more likely to offer the benefit compared with smaller firms. An additional 40% said they were unsure of their coverage — perhaps because employer policies are in flux, Rae said. Employer health plans’ treatment of abortion has changed little since the Dobbs decision, the survey found. Among companies that said they did not cover legally provided abortion services or covered them in limited circumstances, 3% reduced or eliminated abortion coverage. By contrast, of the large companies that generally covered abortion, 12% added or significantly expanded coverage. That’s in sharp contrast to the rapidly changing laws governing abortion access in the states. It’s unclear whether workers at companies that don’t cover abortion or heavily restrict coverage are located primarily in states that have outlawed the procedure. The KFF survey includes information from more than 2,100 large and small companies on their health benefits and the related costs for workers. Annual premiums for family coverage rose 7% on average this year, to $23,968, with employees on average contributing $6,575 toward that cost. The jump in premiums represents a notable increase compared with that of the previous year, when there was virtually no growth in those costs. Average yearly deductibles for workers were $1,735 for single coverage, a cost that was relatively unchanged. One tactic employers use is to provide separate benefits for abortion-related expenses. In response to increasingly restrictive state abortion laws and the Supreme Court’s decision, large companies — such as Amazon, Starbucks, Disney, Meta, and JPMorgan Chase, among others — announced they would pay for employees’ abortion-related travel expenses. However, the KFF survey found that a small share of large employers said they provide or plan to provide workers with financial help to cover abortion-related travel expenses. Companies with at least 5,000 workers are the most likely to provide that assistance. Overall, 7% of large employers said they provide or plan to provide financial assistance to employees who must travel out of state for abortion care. According to the Brigid Alliance, a New York-based nonprofit that helps people with logistics and defrays abortion-related costs, average travel costs now exceed $2,300. As restrictive laws proliferate, distances traveled have also increased since the Dobbsruling, with each person on average traveling roughly 1,300 miles round trip in the first half of 2023. Recent research published by job-search firm Indeed, the Institute of Labor Economics, and academics from the University of Southern California and the University of Maryland found that employers that announced abortion-related travel benefits saw an 8% increase in clicks on their job postings compared with similar jobs at comparable employers that did not announce such a policy. However, job satisfaction among existing employees also dropped at those companies, with ratings of senior management dropping “8%, driven by workers in typically male-dominated jobs,” they wrote, “illustrating both the potential perks and pitfalls for companies that choose to wade into contentious political waters.” 


Article: 20
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Louisiana woman claims she was denied an abortion after fetus was diagnosed with a fatal condition
Author: Amanda Musa
Publication_Date: Published 12:09 AM EDT, Sat August 20, 2022
Article_Content:  CNN  —  A pregnant woman in Louisiana alleges that she was denied an abortion despite the fetus being diagnosed with a fatal condition. At about 10 weeks, Nancy Davis’ baby was diagnosed with acrania, a rare congenital disorder in which a fetus’ skull does not form inside of the womb, according to a statement from civil rights attorney Ben Crump, who represents Davis. Acrania is a lethal condition with death within the first week of life, according to the Fetal Medicine Foundation. However, after Davis decided to get an abortion, the hospital allegedly chose not to perform it, the statement said. “Ms. Nancy Davis was put in a horrifically cruel position by the State of Louisiana, left with only two choices: To carry the fetus until its inevitable death or to travel to another state to end the pregnancy weeks after she made the incredibly painful decision to do so,” Crump said in a statement Thursday. Earlier this month, Davis spoke to CNN affiliate WAFB about her situation, saying doctors told her she would “be carrying the baby to bury the baby.” In a statement to CNN on Friday, a spokesperson for Woman’s Hospital in Baton Rouge, Caroline Isemann, said the hospital cannot comment on a specific patient but said navigating an unviable pregnancy is extremely complex. “We look at each patient’s individual circumstances and how to remain in compliance with all current state laws to the best of our ability,” Isemann told CNN. “Even if a specific diagnosis falls under medically futile exceptions provided by (the Louisiana Department of Health), the laws addressing treatment methods are much more complex and seemingly contradictory.” Isemann told the New York Times that Louisiana’s multiple abortion bans, which use different terminology, complicate matters. “There is currently no guidance on which law controls” the situation, she said, adding that the hospital was struggling to ensure that a doctor who terminates a pregnancy after a diagnosis of acrania was safe from prosecution. Meanwhile, the lawmaker who wrote the state’s abortion law, state Sen. Katrina Jackson, told WAFB that Davis should have been allowed an abortion based on a list of 25 exclusive exceptions from the Louisiana Department of Health. “This woman is seeking a medical procedure for a pregnancy that is not viable outside of the womb,” Jackson told WAFB. Crump’s office said the law is clearly having a negative impact. “Regardless of what Louisiana lawmakers claim, the law is having its intended effect, causing doctors to refuse to perform abortions even when they are medically necessary out of fear of losing their medical licenses or facing criminal charges,” Crump said in a statement. As for Davis, Crump says she will be traveling out of state for the procedure, according to the statement.


Article: 21
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: In the South, looming uncertainty threatens the limited abortion access that remains
Author: Deidre McPhillips
Publication_Date: Updated 8:26 AM EST, Tue November 7, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  — Amy Hagstrom Miller probably knows US geography better than most. The founder and chief executive officer of Whole Woman’s Health, an abortion provider with clinics in multiple states, says it’s become a critical part of her work to know the routes of major highways and the best travel patterns for people to get out of states with restrictions to a provider. After the US Supreme Court decision that removed guaranteed access to abortion in June 2022, disparate state laws have created a fractured abortion landscape in the US – with massive upheaval across the South, in particular. “I’m staring at this map I have of the United States – it’s on a dry erase board because I’ve had to change things all along – but it looks like what I would describe as a new borderlands,” Hagstrom Miller said. She used to think of Mexico, the Gulf of Mexico and the oceans as the borders. Now, she said, she can trace a finger around the South, “and that’s the border now. All those contiguous states [to the South] have banned abortion.” Of the 16 states in the South, 10 have banned abortion. Two have restricted it to the first trimester: Georgia with a six-week limit and North Carolina with a 12-week limit. Florida is one of four states in that US Census region – along with Delaware, Maryland and Virginia – where abortion is legal past the first trimester. And things are far from settled in the region. Major legal and political challenges loom in some states, with impacts that would reverberate through the region – and nationwide. Abortion is legal up to 15 weeks in Florida, making it one of the least restrictive states in the South. It has become a key access point for people who are no longer able to receive care where they live, in addition to a significant number of its own residents. But an impending ruling from the state Supreme Court could bring a dramatic shift. Abortion rights advocates have challenged the state’s 15-week ban, citing a decades-old precedent that abortion is protected by the state Constitution under the right to privacy. If the state’s high court rules that it does not protect the right to abortion, a stricter six-week limit would take effect a month later, limiting access to a time before most people even know they’re pregnant. In the year since the Dobbs decision, abortion providers in Florida reported the third most abortions of any state and the second largest increase, according to a report from #WeCount, a research project led by the Society of Family Planning. There were more than 92,000 abortions in the state, about 20,000 more than the year before. If Florida’s high court rules to restrict abortion access there, it would affect more than a third of abortions in the South and nearly 1 in 10 nationwide. “Florida would be extreme,” Hagstrom Miller said. “I just stare at the map and think, ‘OK, if they ban abortion in Florida or they ban abortion in Georgia, where are people going to go?’” An unbalanced equation Displaced patients from Florida and those from other states who relied on the clinics there would probably head north for care, experts say, flooding providers that are already stretched thin and straining the limited resources that remain. “Abortion bans don’t change the need for an abortion,” Hagstrom Miller said. In fact, average monthly abortions in the US increased in the year after the Dobbs decision, the #WeCount report found – but thousands more patients were served by a significantly smaller number of providers. Providers in states where abortion remains legal are doing their best to keep up. “We don’t know what the next step will be, and it certainly causes anxiety,” said Michael Scheinberg, director of operations for the Falls Church Healthcare Center, an abortion clinic in northern Virginia. It’s hard to say whether the clinic is at full capacity at any time, he says, because there’s ongoing analysis of patient needs and regular adjustments the clinic’s offerings to match. Requests for medication abortion have become more common, for example, but there’s also been an increased need for procedural abortions for people with later gestational age, many of whom have had to travel from other states. “We kind of tweak things around to make sure that we’re able to see as many patients as we possibly can with the resources that we have available, just hoping that we are able to keep up with the trends,” he said. “In this case, the best way that we can work is to be as positive as we can and try to help as much as we can.” Whole Woman’s Health has two clinics in Virginia: one in Alexandria and one a bit farther south in Charlottesville. Although it doesn’t always fill all available appointment slots, patient volumes have increased significantly over the past year, Hagstrom Miller said – and the potential impact of a Florida ban is big enough that she’s considering opening another clinic along the North Carolina border, along with expanding gestational limits and increasing capacity in the existing locations. Even if providers are able to absorb a surge from Florida, individuals seeking abortions need to find the means to travel significant distances for care. Abortion funds can help fill the financial gap for some, but many of those organizations are stretched thin, as well. The Tampa Bay Abortion Fund had to close its doors to new clients for a month this fall, said Bree Wallace, its director of case management. And now, for the first time, it’s budgeting how much it’s spending each month. Donations aren’t as large or as frequent as they were right after the Dobbs decision, Wallace said, despite a growing need. “We’re spending more, but we’re not recouping,” she said. And supporting out-of-state travel would be raise expenses significantly. At the midway point for the latest budget cycle, the Tampa Bay Abortion Fund had used about three-quarters of the allotted monthly funds. Only about $1,000 has been spent on practical support such as travel costs, with the remaining $41,000 put toward appointment costs at clinics. But that ratio would flip dramatically with additional restrictions to abortion access in Florida – and the overall need would only grow, Wallace said.“It’s a lot easier to come up with $350 for appointments versus $350 plus a flight, hotel and all the travel costs for one appointment,” she said. “We’d never leave anyone stranded, so we’re trying to make sure we have money when people might be traveling a lot and it gets more expensive.” No safe haven The potential change in Florida isn’t the only looming uncertainty around abortion access in the US. Virginia is also a crucial access point for people seeking abortion and, like Florida, reported a significant increase in abortions in the year post-Dobbs. Average monthly abortions rose 25%, according to the #WeCount report, a difference of about 550 abortions a month or more than 6,600 additional abortions over the course of a year. This week, Virginia has its first general election since the Dobbs decision, and shifts in the control of the Legislature could pave the way for new restrictions. “This election is so critical for Virginians and so many of our neighbors because Virginia is such a key access state,” said Jamie Lockhart, executive director at Planned Parenthood Advocates of Virginia. “Virginia is truly holding the line, and we need to keep it that way.” Impending change – from a court decision, election results or otherwise – raises anxiety for local providers and compounds broader uncertainty nationwide. The staff members at A Woman’s Choice, an independent abortion clinic with locations in Florida and North Carolina, know that the Florida Supreme Court decisions are typically released each Thursday at 11 a.m. “Our frontline staff in the midst of it. They’re in the middle of clinics, consults, making sure patients are educated about their care and making the best decisions for them and their family,” said Amber Gavin, vice president of advocacy and operations for the organization. “But our leadership team, that’s when we’re on the Florida Supreme Court website, checking and refreshing. There’s a lot of anxiety for a few hours.” The past few Thursdays have brought a “sigh of relief,” she said, but the regular anxiety can wear on patients and staff. “It’s exhausting and frustrating,” Gavin said. “Every time folks hear that there’s change, people think that it immediately goes into effect, and there’s a lot of chaos and confusion.” Patients often call with questions about keeping their appointments, and staff are worried about keeping their jobs, she said. In some ways, operating under uncertainty has become the norm. “We want to retain freedom to abortion care in the South, and we’re working to be that safe haven, but nothing is a certainty,” Scheinberg said. “With the political landscape, it’s very hard to tell exactly what’s going to happen next. I don’t think there is a safe place in the United States. We just have to be vigilant and keep working.”


Article: 22
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Post-Roe, abortion access has dropped in the US, but support has not, survey finds
Author: Deidre McPhillips 
Publication_Date: Published 2:01 PM EDT, Wed April 26, 2023
Article_Content:  CNN  —  The US Supreme Court decision that revoked the federal right to an abortion led to significant restrictions to abortion access, but hasn’t affected public support, according to a new survey from the Pew Research Center. About a year after the court’s Dobbs decision, 80% of US adults say that their views on abortion have not changed. More than 6 in 10 say that abortion should be legal in all or most cases, while about a third say that it should be illegal in all or most cases. This divide has changed little over the past few decades, Pew data shows. Most adults nationwide say that it would still be easy to get an abortion where they live, but that has dropped significantly over the past four years – especially in states where abortions are currently banned. Now, more than 70% of adults in states where abortion is prohibited say that it would be difficult to get one in their area, up from 50% in 2019. In states where there are restrictions or ongoing legal disputes, more than half (56%) of adults say that it would be difficult to get an abortion, up from 41% in 2019. In states where abortion is legal, however, this number has stayed consistently around 20%. Support for abortion has held steady in the United States About a year after the US Supreme Court revoked the constitutional right to an abortion nationwide, most adults say that their views on abortion have not changed. About two-thirds say it should be legal in all or most cases, while about a third say it should be illegal. At the same time, a growing share of adults support easier access to abortions where they live, including more than a quarter of those living in states where it is legal. Other research has shown that the average travel time to get an abortion more than tripled after the Dobbs decision, as states enacting complete or partial bans on abortion effectively cut the number of active facilities by a tenth. The partisan divide on abortions is wide and growing, Pew survey data shows. About 40% of Republicans say that abortion should be legal in all or most cases, holding relatively consistent since 2007. Democrats are more than twice as likely to support legal abortion, growing from 63% support in 2007 to 84% in 2023. Nearly half of Democrats say that it should be easier for someone to get an abortion in the area where they live, while nearly as many Republicans say that it should be harder for someone to get an abortion where they live. And perceptions of local laws differ by party. In states where abortion is currently banned, more than 8 out of 10 Democrats say that it would be difficult for someone to get an abortion, compared with about 6 out of 10 Republicans. A similar gap exists in states where abortion is restricted or facing ongoing legal dispute. Overall, however, there is widespread confusion about abortion laws. An earlier survey from KFF found that nearly half of adults in the US – including 2 out of 5 women of childbearing age – were unsure whether medication abortion is legal in their state. But most demographic groups have held steady in their views on abortion since last year. According to the Pew survey, conservative Republicans are most likely to say that abortion should be illegal in all or most cases – about twice as likely as moderate or liberal Republicans. Also, younger adults are more likely than older adults to say that abortion should be legal, and Black and Asian adults are more likely than White or Hispanic adults to say that abortion should be legal in all or most cases. The Pew survey is based on a representative sample of more than 5,000 adults in the US who were interviewed between March 27 and April 2, before the recent federal rulings on medication abortion. States were classified by the legal status of abortion as of April 14; under state laws, abortion was considered prohibited in 13 states, restricted or in legal dispute in 11 states and legal in 26 states, as well as in Washington, DC.




Article: 23
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: After fall of Roe, future doctors show less interest in training in states with abortion bans or as ob/gyns
Author: Deidre McPhillips and Kyla Russell
Publication_Date: Updated 4:42 PM EDT, Wed April 19, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  — The Supreme Court decision that overturned the federal right to an abortion created a patchwork of laws across the United States and widespread uncertainty. Among those with questions are the nation’s future doctors. Morgan Levy, a medical school student at the University of Miami, said the impacts of the ruling immediately became a point of discussion among her peers. She’ll be applying to residency training programs this fall, and now has to assess whether the new laws will affect what she’s taught and how. “More than ever, I recognize the importance of good, comprehensive, evidence-based reproductive health care,” said Levy, who plans to train as an ob/gyn. In some states, though, it has become “all but impossible” to get formal family planning training, including abortion practices. “There is definitely a consideration of making sure that the training programs that I’m applying to are going to be able to provide the kind of training that I’m going to need in order to be able to do that for my patients,” she said. And new data suggests that these restrictions are having an impact on where – and what – future doctors plan to practice. The number of medical school students who applied to residency training programs ticked down last year, and applications to programs in states with abortion bans dropped the most, according to a new analysis from the Association of American Medical Colleges. Interest in the ob/gyn speciality took a notable dip, with applications dropping 5% nationwide and twice as much in states where abortion is banned. Emergency medicine also saw a significantly large drop in applications. Despite the decline in applications, all ob/gyn residency positions and most others were filled. So while there’s no immediate shortage of physicians in-training, experts say the shift is reason for concern. “I worry about exacerbating these maternal health care and abortion deserts that already exist. We already have a gap,” said Dr. Kristyn Brandi, an ob/gyn in New Jersey and chair of the board of directors for Physicians for Reproductive Health. “Because of that, we need more ob/gyns to join the field to help build up practice in places where we’re losing providers for other reasons.” More than a third of US counties have limited or no access to maternity care, according to a recent report – and there’s notable overlap between maternity care deserts and states where abortion access is limited. Most physicians stay in the area that they trained. If programs in states with abortion bans shift to less desirable training plans, more and more students could prioritize being in less restrictive states for residency – and eventually to practice. Long-term, that could create a “tiered system of health care,” Brandi said. However, experts say it will be important to track the preferences for medical school students in the years to come. Last year’s graduating class applied to residency programs just months after the Supreme Court’s ruling. They had to make decisions before seeing exactly how the programs would react and adjust. “For the next year or two, things are gonna be really uncertain for people. And I think that many people didn’t want to engage in that uncertainty, not knowing what they were signing up for,” Brandi said. For Levy and others, perhaps more important than the specific location of a program is evidence that there is a strong and well-established commitment to training around family planning. “That’s really a green flag to me when programs have a really formal plan in place,” Levy said. The Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell has long participated in the Ryan Residency Training Program that offers a specific focus on abortion and family planning. Dr. Nagaraj Gabbur, who is the director of the ob/gyn residency program there, said that this specialized curriculum is usually one of the top reasons applicants give for why they want to practice there – and especially in the latest round of interviews. For programs outside of “haven states” like New York, this could involve an out-of-state rotation. But for Brandi, rotational programs are just a “Band-Aid” that don’t address the underlying issues challenging reproductive health care – and don’t consider the livelihood of the individual trainee. Also, most of the physicians in the ob/gyn field are women. Even if certain training programs suffice, there might be personal concerns about living in states where abortion is banned, she says. “This may impact not only the care that they want to provide as physicians, but also the care they can receive themselves,” Brandi said. As Levy and her peers consider a major step forward for their lives and career, discussions on the topic are constant – and complicated. “It’s not a black or white or red versus blue kind of issue,” Levy said. There are a lot of mixed emotions as people weigh many different factors, including clinical interests, logistics of the role, personal preference for location and broader implications. Some feel strongly that they should train in a state that has preserved access to abortion, while others, like Levy, feel that there may be opportunity for advocacy in more restrictive environments. “It’s almost less so about the state itself and more so about the program’s attitudes and responses to the decision and the ways in which they’ve affirmed their commitment to making sure great care is provided in their states,” Levy said.


Article: 24
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: The economic consequences of overturning Roe v. Wade will be enormous, experts warn
Author: Anneken Tappe
Publication_Date: Updated 2:13 AM EDT, Wed September 14, 2022
Article_Content: New York CNN Business  —  The overturning of the landmark 1973 Roe v. Wade ruling by the US Supreme Court comes at an economic cost to the nation, economists have warned. Friday’s decision to end the federal constitutional right to an abortion is widely thought to be more ideologically and politically motivated, rather than driven by an attempt to protect women from worse personal and financial outcomes. Those might include financial hardship, restricted ability to attain a higher education and move up the socio-economic ladder, as well as overall poorer health care for women reliant on clinics for preventative care. All of this would affect the state of the workforce, economic output and increase the need for government support, economists say. “This decision will cause immediate economic pain in 26 states where abortion bans are most likely and where people already face lower wages, less worker power, and limited access to health care,” said Heidi Shierholz, president of the Economic Policy Institute, in a statement released Friday. “The fall of Roe will be an additional economic barricade.” The consequences are likely so extensive and far-reaching that it is hard to quantify them, said Jason Lindo, professor of economics at Texas A&M. The economic burden Taking away a woman’s right to choose if and when she has a child has serious consequences for her career and economic circumstances, Lindo told CNN Business. In testimony before the Senate Banking Committee last month, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said that restricting women’s reproductive rights would have “very damaging effects on the economy.” “Roe v. Wade and access to reproductive health care, including abortion, helped lead to increased labor force participation,” Yellen said. “It enabled many women to finish school. That increased their earning potential. It allowed women to plan and balance their families and careers.” Last year, after Texas lawmakers moved to effectively ban abortion in the state, 154 economists filed an amicus brief with the Supreme Court in support of maintaining reproductive freedoms in the United States so that women can realize their full economic and educational potential. Data from the prominent Turnaway Study from the University of California San Francisco, shows that household finances are a major driver of the decision to terminate an unwanted pregnancy. An analysis of the data by the National Bureau of Economic Research shows that the majority of women seeking to terminate a pregnancy near the gestational limits had incomes below the poverty line. Women who were denied an abortion, meanwhile, had higher rates of poverty, higher unemployment and greater need for government assistance. This, in turn, affects the economic well-being and prospects of their children, according to economists. “There is a huge [body of] literature showing long-run effects of the economic circumstances of the household in which a child grows up. On educational attainment, adult earnings, use of social assistance programs, involvement in crime, etc. The list goes on and on,” said Lindo. Health and safety Economists are also worried that overall female health care will suffer as a result of restricting or prohibiting abortions. For many women, clinics that offer family planning services are often also the local option for preventative care, including cancer screenings and pap tests. Having easy access to these clinics plays a crucial role in their health care. “When distance to the nearest clinic increases, rates of preventative care go down,” said David Slusky, associate professor of economics at the University of Kansas. And that can lead to worse health outcomes. “If a woman of childbearing age dies, it has enormous economic consequences,” he added. “It’s someone who society has invested in and who has many productive economic years ahead of them.”




Article: 25
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: House passes ‘born alive’ abortion bill
Author: Clare Foran and Melanie Zanona
Publication_Date: Updated 2:33 AM EST, Thu January 12, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  — House Republicans are spotlighting the issue of abortion as they roll out their legislative agenda in the new Congress – a move that comes after the Supreme Court’s highly consequential decision last summer to overturn the landmark 1973 Roe v. Wade ruling. The GOP-led House voted on Wednesday to pass a bill that would require health care providers to try to preserve the life of an infant in the rare case that a baby is born alive during or after an attempted abortion. The bill is not expected to be taken up in the Democratic-controlled Senate, but passage in the House serves as a messaging opportunity for the new Republican majority. The vote was 220 to 210. Under the bill, health providers who fail to comply with the requirements for care could face fines or up to five years in prison. The bill would not impose penalties on the mother and would grant the mother protection from any kind of prosecution. Opponents have argued that such measures restrict abortion access by threatening health care providers. It is already considered homicide in the US to intentionally kill an infant that is born alive. The decision by the new Republican majority to hold the vote comes after Democrats worked to make abortion a front-and-center issue during the midterm elections following Roe’s reversal. Republicans succeeded in taking back control of the House in the midterms, but a much-anticipated “red wave” failed to materialize, leading to questions – and finger pointing within the GOP – over exactly which factors played a key role in the outcome. The measure the House voted on – called the “Born-Alive Abortion Survivors Protection Act” – was introduced on Monday by Republican Rep. Ann Wagner of Missouri. NARAL Pro-Choice America released a statement on Tuesday criticizing the bill, along with several others. “These bills make it plain: House Republicans are patently rejecting the will of the overwhelming majority of Americans who voted to support legal abortion in November,” the organization’s president Mini Timmaraju said. “Meanwhile, our Democratic reproductive freedom champions in the House are ready and willing to fight to restore and expand access to abortion—and we thank them for that.” The House also voted on Wednesday to pass a separate measure condemning “recent attacks on pro-life facilities, groups and churches.” Republicans control only a razor-thin majority in the House – and divides between moderates and conservatives were on full display in the chaotic, dayslong effort to elect Kevin McCarthy as speaker. Now, the new GOP majority faces the challenge of bringing bills to the floor that will unite, not divide, their conference – and Republicans are attempting to thread the needle. Rep. Nancy Mace, a South Carolina Republican who has been a vocal critic of her party’s abortion messaging, called on Republican leadership to balance “women’s rights” with the “right to life,” warning Wednesday that there are “political dangers” for Republicans if they don’t “find some middle ground on the issue.” “I have been very vocal, both privately with my leadership, and also publicly,” Mace said. “This is an issue that we lost on. We buried our heads in the sand after Roe v. Wade, and we lost seats because of this issue.” Mace voted for both abortion-related bills that were on the House floor Wednesday, but expressed concern over a potential federal abortion ban if it includes language that requires women to report their rapes or imprisons doctors who provide the procedure Asked how she thinks the GOP can better address women’s rights, Mace – a rape victim who who has spoken openly – said she is working on legislation related to rape kits, as well as legislation expanding birth control access. “We’ll see how seriously those things are taken,” she added.




Article: 26
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: See where abortions are banned and legal — and where it’s still in limbo
Author: Annette Choi and Devan Cole
Publication_Date: Updated 12:50 PM EDT, Mon October 30, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  Following the Supreme Court’s June 2022 decision in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which eliminated a constitutional right to abortion nationwide, nearly two dozen US states have banned or limited access to the procedure. States where abortion is most limited report higher rates of maternal and infant mortality, as well as greater economic insecurity. All eyes are on Ohio this election cycle, as voters will be deciding whether to add an amendment protecting abortion rights in the state constitution. In a special election in August, Ohio voters rejected an initiative that would have made it harder to amend the state constitution — a critical victory for abortion rights advocates. The fight over abortion is well underway in state legislatures. Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin announced on Sept. 18 that it would resume abortion care services, after a judge ruled that a law from 1849 widely interpreted as an abortion ban did not apply to abortion procedures.  The South Carolina Supreme Court in August reversed a temporary block on a “heartbeat bill” — which would ban abortion at the time when a fetus’ heartbeat can be detected, usually as early as six weeks into a pregnancy. This year, health care providers and abortion activists have continued to file legal challenges to stop bans in several states from being enforced. In July, Iowa banned most abortions at about six weeks of pregnancy, before most people know they are pregnant. A district judge, however, placed a temporary hold  just a few days after it went into effect. Abortions remain legal in Iowa until 22 weeks.  Also in July, a  Wisconsin judge blocked a first-of-its-kind ban on abortion pills a week before it was intended to take effect in the state. Georgia’s six-week abortion ban was stopped last November by a state court, but days later, the state’s Supreme Court allowed the ban to go into effect while an appeal plays out. As these legal challenges make their way through the courts, patients seeking access to the procedure must navigate a complicated patchwork of legislation, often requiring them to travel hundreds of miles. Here’s where abortion access currently stands in the United States. STATE Legal status of abortion Details Alabama Banned Abortion is banned with no exceptions for rape or incest. Arkansas Banned Abortion is banned with no exceptions for rape or incest. Idaho Banned Near-total ban in place. Indiana Banned Abortion is banned with limited exceptions. The Indiana Supreme Court certified a ruling that outlaws nearly all abortions in the state and denied a petition for a rehearing. Kentucky BannedAbortion is banned with no exceptions for rape or incest.Louisiana Banned Abortion is banned with no exceptions for rape or incest. Mississippi Banned Near-total ban in place, includes exception for rape but not incest. Missouri Banned Abortion is banned with no exceptions for rape or incest. North Dakota Banned Abortion is banned with exceptions for rape or incest in the first six weeks of pregnancy. Oklahoma Banned Abortion is banned with no exceptions for rape or incest. South Dakota Banned Abortion is banned with no exceptions for rape or incest. Tennessee Banned Abortion is banned with no exceptions for rape or incest. Texas Banned Abortion is banned with no exceptions for rape or incest. West Virginia Banned Near-total ban in place. A federal judge ruled in August that the state can also restrict the sale of abortion pills. Arizona Legal with gestational limit of 6-18 weeks A 15-week ban went into effect in September. Table with 3 columns and 50 rows. Currently displaying rows 16 to 30. STATE Legal status of abortion Details Florida  Legal with gestational limit of 6-18 weeks Abortion is banned after 15 weeks of pregnancy. Georgia Legal with gestational limit of 6-18 weeks Abortion is banned as early as six weeks of pregnancy. The state’s Supreme Court upheld the six-week ban in a ruling in October, reversing a lower court’s decision to void the 2019 ban. Nebraska Legal with gestational limit of 6-18 weeks Abortion is banned after 12 weeks of pregnancy with exceptions for sexual assault, incest and medical emergencies. North Carolina Legal with gestational limit of 6-18 weeks A 12-week ban on most abortions went into effect on July 1. South Carolina Legal with gestational limit of 6-18 weeks Abortion is banned as early as six weeks of pregnancy. The South Carolina Supreme Court reversed a temporary block on a near-total ban in August. Utah Legal with gestational limit of 6-18 weeks A court has blocked the state from enforcing its "trigger" abortion ban, but an 18-week ban remains in effect. Alaska Legal Abortion remains legal with no gestational limit. CaliforniaLegal Abortion remains legal until viability. Colorado Legal Abortion remains legal with no gestational limit. Connecticut Legal Abortion remains legal until viability. Delaware Legal Abortion remains legal until viability. Hawaii Legal Abortion remains legal until viability. Illinois Legal Abortion remains legal until viability. Iowa Legal Abortion remains legal until 22 weeks. A district judge temporarily blocked a law that would have banned most abortions as early as six weeks into pregnancy, before most people know they are pregnant. Kansas Legal Table with 3 columns and 50 rows. Currently displaying rows 31 to 45. STATE Legal status of abortion Details Maine Legal Abortion remains legal until viability. Maryland Legal Abortion remains legal until viability.  Massachusetts Legal Abortion remains legal until 24 weeks. Michigan Legal Voters approved constitutional amendment to enshrine abortion rights in 2022. Minnesota Legal Abortion remains legal until viability. Montana Legal Abortion remains legal in Montana until viability and protected in state constitution, but legislature has indicated it may pass new restrictions. Nevada Legal Abortion remains legal until 24 weeks. New Hampshire Legal Abortion remains legal until 24 weeks. New Jersey Legal Abortion remains legal with no gestational limit. New Mexico Legal Abortion remains legal with no gestational limit. New York Legal Abortion remains legal until viability. Ohio Legal A law banning abortion after cardiac activity can be detected, typically six weeks, has been blocked by an injunction while litigation continues. Currently, abortion is legal until 22 weeks. Oregon Legal Abortion remains legal with no gestational limit. Pennsylvania Legal Abortion remains legal until 24 weeks, though not expressly protected by state law. Rhode Island Legal Table with 3 columns and 50 rows. Currently displaying rows 46 to 50. STATE Legal status of abortion Details Vermont Legal Abortion remains legal with no gestational limit. Virginia Legal Abortion remains legal until the third trimester, though not expressly protected by state law. Washington Legal Abortion remains legal until viability. Wisconsin Legal Abortion remains legal until 22 weeks. After a judge ruled that an 1849 law did not apply to abortion, Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin announced on Sept. 18 that it would resume abortion care services. Wyoming Legal A district judge temporarily blocked a state abortion ban in March, days after it took effect. Abortion remains legal until viability. Wyoming is also the first state to pass legislation explicitly banning the use of abortion pills. The ban was intended to take effect July 1 but was put on pause by a judge in late June.




Article: 27
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Confusion on abortion, mistrust in US Supreme Court followed Dobbs decision, survey finds
Author: Deidre McPhillips
Publication_Date: Published 5:00 AM EDT, Fri May 26, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  The US Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision, which overturned Roe v. Wade, created a fractured abortion landscape in the United States. Nearly a year later, a new KFF survey shows that it has left widespread confusion about the legal status of abortion, along with little trust in the high court to decide cases on reproductive health. Most adults in the United States disapprove of the Supreme Court’s performance in general, the survey found, along with more than 6 of 10 who say that they don’t trust the court’s ability to decide cases related to reproductive and sexual health. In April, the Supreme Court made another significant abortion-related decision, this time protecting access to mifepristone – a drug that is approved for use in medication abortion by the US Food and Drug Administration – which has been challenged in lower courts. Nearly two-thirds of survey participants say that they have at least some confidence in the FDA’s efforts to ensure that medications are safe and effective, and most agree that it would be inappropriate for a court to overturn that authority. Awareness of mifepristone grew significantly in the past year amid the legal attention. But there’s still general uncertainty around the legal status of abortion. In the 14 states where abortion is banned, about 1 in 8 residents incorrectly believes that medication abortion is still legal there. And more than half of residents say they are unsure of the legality of abortion in their state. Amid the confusion and unease, many women are changing their approach to contraception. More than half of women under 50 say that they or someone they know has taken a precaution – such as getting a new prescription for contraception, stocking up on contraception options or delaying getting pregnant – because they were concerned about having access to an abortion, the survey found. And abortion remains a key issue for voters heading into the 2024 presidential election. About 3 in 10 registered voters say that they will vote only for a candidate who shares their views on abortion. No party has a clear majority; about a third say that neither represents their views. But respondents are more likely to say that their views align with the Democratic Party (42%) than the Republican Party (26%). The new KFF survey data is based on responses from a representative sample of about 1,700 adults collected in mid-May.



Article: 28
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: America’s chaotic new reality over abortion takes shape
Author: Stephen Collinson
Publication_Date: Updated 8:02 AM EDT, Mon June 27, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  After the celebration and grief comes the chaos of a nation split by bitter political divides that now determine where women can access abortion. The Supreme Court’s landmark decision on Friday to overturn the near 50-year constitutional right for a woman to end a pregnancy is triggering aftershocks that have already begun to change the character of American life. The realization is dawning that a daring conservative Supreme Court majority has, with its willingness to trample long-held precedent, introduced a destabilizing dynamic that may go far beyond abortion in a nation already internally estranged by ideology. More practically, and suddenly, abortion services have already ended in some conservative states. In some places on Friday, women in clinics were told as soon as the Supreme Court decision came down that their chance of an abortion in the state was gone. Wisconsin has reverted to a 19th century law banning abortion. South Dakota’s last abortion clinic is preparing to move to Minnesota. Other red states are expected to act within days.More liberal states like California are vowing to serve as havens for women, setting up inter-state clashes that will further balkanize America. Fear is growing among progressives over what the court will do next. At nationwide Pride parades this weekend, the aching question was whether the hard-won right to same-sex marriage, enshrined by the court just seven years ago, is now at risk from activist justices. Uncertainty is growing about how the ruling will affect fertility treatments and even contraception. And businesses are hurriedly working out plans to compensate employees or extend health insurance to cover out-of-state abortion services but also worrying about alienating leaders in red states spoiling for a fight. Abortion is a deeply personal issue for people of all political beliefs. Many conservatives view the procedure as the murder of an unborn child. Many other Americans view the Supreme Court’s move as a callous infringement on human rights, namely a woman’s ability to make choices about her own body. Public opinion is often more nuanced than the black-and-white certainties of the political debate, especially over at what point of a pregnancy abortion should be allowed and what exceptions should be made for rape, incest or the health of the mother, but the reality remains that a clear majority of the country did not want to see the court overturn Roe. The core rationale of the court’s conservative majority on Friday was that by returning the issue to the states, it would enable a democratic resolution of a contentious national issue. The last three days suggest that position was either naïve or willfully self-deceiving. Republican leaders are already grappling, and in many cases, failing, to come up with answers about how and if they will help new mothers, whom they will force to bear children they may not want, even in some cases after rape and incest. Across at least half of the United States, the Supreme Court’s ruling promised new hardship for poor and minority Americans who in many cases cannot afford to travel to have an abortion or are already hurt by insufficient social services. Leading Democrats responded with strong words and vows to fight back but have yet to mount an effective response, either politically ahead of 2022 or practically on the ground, where millions of women are suddenly left without their rights. Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren said the court has “set a torch” to its legitimacy. And New York Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who accused conservative justices of lying in their Senate confirmation hearings about how they would rule on abortion, said impeachment should be on the table. But as President Joe Biden left Saturday for the G7 summit of industrialized nations in Germany, White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre said he was sticking by his opposition to expanding the court and to eliminating the Senate filibuster. While the latter move would be needed to codify the right to abortion – it’s unlikely all Democrats in the Senate would go along with abolishing the 60-vote threshold. This new evidence of the gap between Biden and progressives may fuel fresh speculation about his standing in his party as he prepares to run for reelection. Republicans celebrate – but face new scrutiny But after a stunning conservative victory that electrified the GOP base, Republicans hoping to widen their national appeal must also consider how to position themselves in ways that won’t alienate moderate and some women voters amid complex and nuanced attitudes toward abortion. Former President Donald Trump was basking in the credit that he is due for installing a radical conservative majority on the Supreme Court. As a rally crowd in Illinois chanted “Thank you Trump” on Saturday night, the ex-commander-in-chief proclaimed a “victory for life.” Privately though, Trump was worried about the impact of the upheaval on his 2024 White House hopes and Republicans, The New York Times reported. Whatever the merits of the court’s hotly debated recent decisions on guns and religion’s place in society, its overturning of the 1973 Roe v. Wade decision revealed a stark reality about the newly authoritarian GOP. The party’s most prominent figure – Trump – sought to deny voters their most fundamental right to choose their leader with his lies and coup attempt after the 2020 election. Then the Supreme Court majority that he built – alongside Republican Senate leader Mitch McConnell’s questionable confirmation maneuverings – removed a constitutional right from Americans for the first time in history, flagrantly disregarding majority opinion. This confluence of radicalism will have huge implications for US democracy in the years to come. For decades, the battle to end abortion has been a central rallying issue of GOP politics. But now it’s suddenly also become a governing challenge. South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem, for instance, on Sunday dodged questions on CBS’s “Face the Nation” over whether she would offer paid leave to expectant mothers deprived of abortions, expand health care and how the state would enforce her opposition to the use of abortion pills mailed from other states. “We will make sure that mothers have the resources, protection and medical care that they need. And we’re being aggressive on that,” she said before pivoting to an unrelated attack on Biden in an interview long on platitudes but short on specifics. Democrats search for a response The Democratic response to Friday’s Supreme Court decision has so far been a mix of disbelief, anger and promises to not give up the fight, but so far, no clear strategy. A CBS News/YouGov poll conducted Friday and Saturday found that 59% of Americans disapprove of the Supreme Court’s decision. That ought to give Democrats a solid foundation to turn the midterm elections and the 2024 presidential race into a referendum on the Supreme Court. But high inflation and record gasoline prices threaten to doom the party’s majorities in Congress regardless. On CNN’s “State of the Union,” Georgia Democratic gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams pointed to a Georgia law due to come into force within days that bans abortion at six weeks, as she sought to weaponize the issue against her Republican opponent and the current governor in one of the marquee midterm races. “I would tell anyone, whether you’re a business or a citizen thinking about being in Georgia, to take into very real consideration the danger that Brian Kemp poses to the life and welfare of women in this state,” Abrams told Jake Tapper. Speaking on ABC News’ “This Week,” Warren said the court had undermined its own legitimacy. “They just took the last of it and set a torch to it with the Roe v. Wade opinion,” the Massachusetts Democrat said, calling for more justices to be added to the court. A court does not lose legitimacy simply because it delivers opinions particular politicians may not agree with. And conservative scholars would argue that the majority’s recent rulings are justified by constitutional arguments. But the controversial construction of the right-wing majority – after McConnell paved the way for Friday’s ruling by blocking ex-President Barack Obama’s nominee in an election year and rushing Trump’s final nominee onto the court in the same circumstances – has no doubt tarnished its image. As has the fact that several senators now say they were misled by Trump nominees about how they would adjudicate abortion cases. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York suggested that Trump Supreme Court picks should be impeached for “lying under oath” about their positions on abortion. But even if the Democratic-led House pursued such a long-shot strategy, it’s inconceivable there would be a two-thirds majority to convict in the closely divided Senate. But a new week could bring new decisions that underline the radicalism of the Supreme Court majority. Already, it used its opinion in the abortion case to almost mock critics who warn it should consider the impact of its literal reading of the Constitution, written in the 18th century, on 21st century society.



Article: 29
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: What is medication abortion, and who has access to it?
Author: Jen Christensen
Publication_Date: Updated 5:05 PM EDT, Mon June 27, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  Now that the US Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, the case that established the federal right to an abortion, the next battle may be over access to abortion pills. Some states have restricted the practice, but in December, the US Food and Drug Administration relaxed certain federal regulations on what is now the most commonly used abortion method in the United States. What is medication abortion? Medication abortion, also known as abortion with pills or medical abortion, is a method by which someone ends their pregnancy by taking two pills, rather than having a surgical procedure. The first pill is mifepristone, sold under the brand names Mifeprex or Korlym. It’s also known as RU 486. The second pill is called misoprostol. How does it work? Mifepristone blocks a hormone called progesterone, which the body needs for the pregnancy to continue. The hormone helps maintain the inside of the uterus. When the hormone is absent, the uterus will expel its contents. After taking mifepristone, the patient waits 24 to 48 hours to take misoprostol. That helps empty the uterus through bleeding and muscle contractions. The drugs typically cause intense cramps and heavy bleeding for about 3 to 5 hours. A regular menstrual period will usually resume in a couple of weeks. Within 14 days of taking the medicine, the patient will typically go back to a health clinic or doctor’s office for a follow-up appointment. A health care professional will do a lab test or an ultrasound to confirm that the abortion is complete. They will also check the patient for infection. When can you have a medication abortion? The drugs can be taken immediately after someone learns that they’re pregnant, up to 11 weeks after the first day of the last menstrual period, depending on where the person lives. State laws vary. Can you get pregnant again after having it? Yes, but a person who takes these drugs should use a birth control for at least a month afterward. When was the process approved?The FDA approved mifepristone, coupled with misoprostol, for abortion use in 2000. This combination is also available in more than 60 other countries. In 2016, the FDA approved a supplemental application from the maker of Mifeprex to change the regimen and the drug label. Who shouldn’t take the drugs? Medication abortion medicines shouldn’t be taken 70 or more days after the start of the last menstrual period. People who have certain health conditions or who have had an ectopic pregnancy, a rare event in which the fertilized egg implants outside the uterus, shouldn’t have a medication abortion. It’s not recommended for people who have an intrauterine device (IUD) for birth control, although the device can be removed before the medication abortion. People on long-term systemic corticosteroid therapy and those who are allergic to the drugs or similar medications also shouldn’t use them. People with anemia can take the drugs, but they may need more monitoring because of the bleeding that happens. How many people use this method? The number of people seeking abortions overall has fallen, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. But the percentage of people using an abortion pill has increased among those who chose to have an abortion. A February study from the Guttmacher Institute, a reproductive rights think tank, found that an estimated 54% of people chose this method in 2020. In 2017, 39% did. How do you get the pills?Unlike with most medications that you can pick up at a nearby pharmacy, only a health care provider who is certified can order, prescribe and dispense the pills for a medication abortion. Since 2011, the medicine has come from a restricted program called the Mifepristone Shared REMS Program. REMS stands for Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy, a program the FDA uses for specific drugs to make sure the benefit outweighs any risk. Typically, drugs are in this program have some complications or contraindications. There are 62 drugs in REMS programs, including some cancer drugs, drugs used to treat MS, antipsychotics, opioids and testosterone. Drugs in this program usually require a provider to be certified to administer them, and some require the provider follow a specific plan to educate the patient about how the drug works. Telehealth is an option in some states. A person can consult with a provider by phone or text and then receive the pills by mail if the person lives in a state where abortion is legal. “The law of the patient’s location is what’s going to control if the person has access,” said Amanda Allen, senior counsel and director of the Lawyering Project, an organization that uses the law to improve abortion access. A person could also go to a state where abortion is legal and have the pills shipped there. Are the rules the same about access to abortion pills across the US? Access to pills is not equal in all states. In April 2021, the FDA allowed medication abortion pills to be sent by mail during the Covid-19 pandemic and said it would no longer enforce a rule that required women to get the first of the two pills in person at a clinic or hospital. In December, it removed the requirement that mifepristone be dispensed only in certain health care settings. It added a requirement that pharmacies be certified to dispense it. As of April, 32 states permit only licensed physicians to prescribe mifepristone pills according to the Guttmacher Institute. Nineteen require a clinician to be physically present when a person takes this medicine, that restricts the telemedicine option. Two states prohibit the use of medication abortion at a particular time in the pregnancy. Seven states put laws on the books that require providers to tell patients that the process could be reversed if they are given a high amount of progesterone, but scientific evidence does not support this claim. Similar laws in Arizona and North Dakota have been held up or delayed in court. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and several other medical associations have long advocated for the removal of restrictions on how the drugs are administered. The restrictions, the group argues, “do not make the care safer, are not based on medical evidence or need, and create barriers to clinician and patient access to medication abortion.” Will new state laws impact this form of abortion? As of June, the Guttmacher Institute predicts at least 26 states are certain, or will likely, ban abortion to the “fullest extent possible.” There are 13 states with “trigger” laws that immediately or quickly ban abortion with a few exceptions. State laws do not seem to distinguish between medication or surgical abortion. In June, Twenty two state attorneys general reaffirmed their commitment to expanding access to abortion care in their states. It is not settled law yet as to whether states can ban the pills. On Friday, US Attorney General Merrick Garland promised to protect access. “We stand ready to work with other arms of the federal government that seek to use their lawful authorities to protect and preserve access to reproductive care,” Garland said in a statement. “In particular, the FDA has approved the use of the medication Mifepristone. States may not ban Mifepristone based on disagreement with the FDA’s expert judgment about its safety and efficacy.” It is likely that the matter will have to be determined by the courts. “It’s a very interesting argument that the FDA actually preempts state laws in this instance, and it could be a creative legal theory for restoring some access,” said Allen. Are there side effects? Studies show that this abortion method is considered safe and highly effective. Common side effects include vomiting, diarrhea, nausea, weakness and dizziness. These usually happen in the first 24 hours after taking the second drug. Rare side effects include a fast heartbeat, fainting and fatal infections. There is a 0.4% risk of major complications. The associated mortality rate is less than 0.0001%, studies show. What if it doesn’t work? The method works 99.6% of the time, studies show, if the pills are taken at nine weeks of pregnancy or sooner. In weeks nine through 10, it works 91% to 93% of the time; it works about 87% of the time in weeks 10 through 11. If the abortion is not complete, the woman may need to take the medicine again. In rare cases, they may have to have a surgical abortion.


Article: 30
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Medication abortion now makes up the majority of US abortions, study shows, as states push to restrict it
Author: Tierney Sneed
Publication_Date: Published 9:33 AM EST, Thu February 24, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  — More than half of US abortions in 2020 were conducted using medication, according to new data assembled by a reproductive rights think tank that marked a notable inflection point in the method’s growing popularity amid new efforts to limit access to the pills. Use of medication abortion, in which patients use a two-pill regime to end their pregnancies, has been increasing steadily since the method was approved in 2000. However, the Covid-19 pandemic – and how it made patients more comfortable with telehealth while a facilitating a loosening of federal regulations around the pills’ use – may have increased the method’s prevalence. As medication abortion has become more popular, however, Republican-controlled states have become more aggressive about imposing their own limits on access. “We’re seeing two major trends in 2022. One is around abortion bans. And the other is around medication abortion,” said Elizabeth Nash, senior state issues manager at the Guttmacher Institute, which collected the new data. Surveying all known abortion providers, preliminary data assembled by Guttmacher show that 54% of US abortions in 2020 were medication abortions. That is a significant increase from 2017, the last time the think tank reported data of this sort, when medication abortions made up 39% of abortions. While some individual states may have crossed the 50% threshold in earlier years, the new report is the first time medication abortion has been shown to make up a majority of abortions nationwide, according to Guttmacher. Federal regulations allow for medication abortion pills to be sent in the mail; prior to the pandemic, the federal government required patients to pick up the pills in person at a clinic, even if they would ultimately take the pills at home. In December, the US Food and Drug Administration announced it was permanently lifting that in-person requirement, after a 2020 court order prompted the agency to suspend it temporarily for the pandemic. As the Supreme Court appears poised gut the national legal standard protecting abortion rights, permanently relaxing medication abortion rules was one of very few actions the federal government could take to shore up access to the procedure. The FDA’s move has already been counteracted by several Republican-led states, where bills targeting medication abortion use are becoming a focus of lawmakers. The measures have included state proposals that maintain the pills’ in-person pick up requirement, adopt limits earlier in the pregnancy for when it can be prescribed, or bans on medication abortion altogether. Eight states passed legislation last year targeting the method, according to Nash. Since the beginning of 2022, lawmakers in 16 states have introduced bills restricting its use – though some of those bills were introduced in Democratic-controlled states like Illinois and Washington, where they are unlikely to gain traction. Nash noted that in 2021,Texas lawmakers passed a bill restricting use of medication abortion alongside a six-week abortion ban that the Supreme Court has allowed to remain in effect. “I think that states are looking to mimic what Texas did,” she said.


Article: 31
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: States with restrictive abortion laws place more kids in foster care, particularly kids of color
Author: Jen Christensen
Publication_Date: Published 11:00 AM EST, Mon November 6, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  A new study finds that in states with certain restrictive abortion laws, even before the US Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, the number of children whose parents couldn’t or wouldn’t care for them increased and their children end up in foster care. The study, published Monday in JAMA Pediatrics, found that there was an 11% increase in children placed in foster care in states with certain abortion restrictions called TRAP laws, following the enactment of those TRAP laws, relative to states without such abortion restrictions. The study saw this increase by comparing the number of children who were conceived between 1990 and 2011 and placed in foster care between 2000 and 2020 in states with TRAP laws to those who lived in states without such laws. More than 4 million children went into foster care during this time period. Black children disproportionately got placed in foster care. TRAP stands for Targeted Restrictions on Abortion Providers. Ever since abortion became legal in 1973, states found ways to create laws that reduce access to abortion by restricting what clinics can and can’t do. Often restrictions become so burdensome, down to prescribing how long a hall in a clinic must be, clinics shut down. So, people seeking an abortion in these states may have a right to an abortion, but finding one is impossible. Twenty-three states have such restrictions. Anti-abortion politicians often argue TRAP laws protect mothers and children, but multiple studies and courts have found that the laws do not make the procedure any safer. Compared to people who live in states without abortion access issues, studies have consistently shown that pregnant people who live in abortion-restrictive states typically face more problems, some of them are even deadly. People are much more likely to die in childbirth or die due to a pregnancy-related issues, particularly people of color who live in abortion restricted states, earlier studies have shown and so are their infants. People denied abortions are also much more likely to experience financial distress. An 11% increase in the number of children put into foster care may not sound like a lot, but the foster care system is already overburdened. The situation became even more stressed during the pandemic. In 2022, more than half of all states saw a significant decline in the number of available foster care homes, one study showed. So, even an 11% increase could push the system into further jeopardy. With the Supreme Court decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, the situation isn’t likely to improve, according to study coauthor Dr. Savannah Atkins, a lecturer in Economics at Bentley University. “Now with a total restriction of abortion in certain states, we’re obviously going to see this being exacerbated,” said Atkins. “We need to take into account these effects when we’re thinking of these, you know, sweeping legislations that regulate abortion.” An editorial that accompanied the new study, written by doctors at Indiana University Medical School, highlighted the disproportionate burden abortion restrictions place on racial and ethnic minority families. The study found mainly families from these communities had to put children into foster care not due to neglect or abuse, but because they didn’t have adequate housing. “I thought it was really sad and devastating,” said editorial co-author Dr. Tracey Wilkinson, an associate professor of pediatrics at Indiana University School of Medicine. “I think when people hear foster care, I think their head goes to a space of either neglect or abuse. And that’s not what’s happening here.” Wilkinson said even when she sees patients who experience neglect or abuse, sometimes when she calls child protective services, the department cannot even return her calls; they are that overwhelmed with cases. “These long-term downstream impacts of abortion restrictions will significantly add to this burden,” Wilkinson who is a pediatrician said. In the editorial, she and her colleague Dr. Caitlin Barnard, an assistant professor in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Indiana University School of Medicine, pointed out what they say is flawed reasoning behind abortion restrictions. “This highlights the contradiction in the anti abortion position as it purports to protect women and families and at the same time, refuses to provide the support needed to safely raise their children,” the editorial said. “It is a sad day when we are faced with statistical evidence that our national policy includes forcing women to carry pregnancies and deliver children only to take them away due to an inability to afford housing.”While there are loving foster families, children placed in foster care often fare worse when it comes to health, education, and income, than those who come from stable homes, particularly children of color, research shows. Adkins says she knows firsthand that foster care can be good for children. Her own parents adopted some of her younger siblings out of foster care, but generally, being in foster care is not ideal for children. “If you think about research that has been done on the effects of people that are in the foster care system itself, they’re obviously affected negatively in terms of their education, their health, and their mental health,” Adkins said. “So, it’s not just the burden that’s now placed on the foster care system that these abortion restrictions have had; it’s all these other effects, even after, that are now being impacted as well.”



Article: 32
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: How abortion bans could be enforced with Roe v. Wade reversed
Author: Tierney Sneed
Publication_Date: Updated 5:36 PM EDT, Fri June 24, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  The Supreme Court’s landmark decision allowing states to ban abortion raises new questions about how authorities will enforce such bans and whether the anti-abortion movement will stick to its public emphasis on protecting abortion seekers themselves from prosecution. What has been the pattern abroad in countries that ban abortion, along with United States’ own experience before Roe, previews a complicated and unequal enforcement landscape. For years as they fought to overturn Roe v. Wade, leaders of the anti-abortion movement have stressed that prosecutions should be focused on abortion providers and others who facilitate the procedure, rather than the person seeking it. But the movement’s critics point to examples of when the criminal justice system has already – with Roe still on the books – been turned on women whose pregnancies have been purposely or inadvertently terminated. In one 2018 case, for instance, a Mississippi woman who experienced a stillbirth was accused of second degree murder after authorities obtained her phone data and found she had searched for abortion pills. (The case was later dropped after prosecutors took a closer look at the evidence, including the use of a scientifically questionable test to supposedly determine whether the fetus had been born alive.) One major challenge abortion foes will be facing if Roe falls is the growing use of medication abortion, which allows for women to manage their own abortions in two-pill regimen without the help of the kind of physician that would conventionally be prosecuted under an abortion ban. Because pregnancies that end in a natural miscarriage are often indistinguishable from those terminated with a pill, it’s possible that women’s private data and the information they share with their medical staff will be weaponized by prosecutors. Even if the woman herself is not criminally liable, she may still be dragged through the law enforcement process as part of prosecutors’ efforts to investigate whether her pregnancy was illegally terminated. “What I found in my research is that women were indeed punished, even if, you know, almost none of them are prosecuted and incarcerated for having an abortion,” said Leslie Reagan, a history professor at University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and author of “When Abortion Was a Crime.” “That is through the methods of enforcement: interrogating women who were seeking emergency services after having an abortion or trying to induce their own.” How suspicions of abortions could be investigated Whether to bring a case under a state abortion restriction will be a decision ultimately for the local prosecutor, and the promise of some district attorneys in Democratic-leaning localities to not prosecute abortion crimes has prompted red states to explore other mechanisms to carry out bans. But in places where law enforcement officials seek to enforce abortion prohibitions, medical staff who provide treatment to women whose pregnancies have ended could also end up being a source of information for law enforcement officers. In El Salvador, a country with an extremely aggressive approach to carrying out its ban on abortion, government officials are dispatched to hospitals to stress to medical staff their obligation to report suspicions that a patient has intentionally ended her pregnancy, according to Michelle Oberman, a Santa Clara University School of Law professor and author of “Her Body, Our Laws: On the Frontlines of the Abortion War from El Salvador to Oklahoma.” Doctors are told that “if they don’t report those women, they themselves can be subject to fines and other penalties,” Oberman said. In the United States’ pre-Roe era, women who sought medical care after abortions faced interrogations, Reagan said, including threats that “we won’t provide medical, the medical care that you urgently, urgently need” unless they cooperated with the investigations. Even now, medical care that women receive for pregnancies that have been ended can lead to law enforcement getting involved, according to Dana Sussman, the acting executive director of National Advocates for Pregnant Women. Sussman’s organization provides defense attorneys and other resources for people facing charges or investigations related to pregnancy and its outcomes. The organization has documented 1,700 arrests, prosecutions, detentions, or forced medical interventions between 1973 and 2020 on women related to pregnancy or pregnancy outcomes, though the majority of those cases don’t involve a pregnancy loss or abortion. If Roe is reversed, Sussman said, “I think that there will potentially be a lot more collaboration between health care providers and the police.” The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act – a 1996 law also known as HIPAA that sets privacy standards for protecting patients’ personal medical information – has exceptions for law enforcement purposes, Sussman noted. “As we expand the ways in which criminal law applies in these contexts, the HIPAA protections are going to be more limited.” Another common tactic the organization has seen in its work is law enforcement using women’s personal data to find evidence. “When you do have someone who presents with a pregnancy loss and the police or prosecutors are trying to build a case that there was a self-managed abortion,” Sussman told CNN, “what they will look at is one’s digital footprint … who they communicated with and when and about what, what they searched, for purchases they made, credit card bills.” She predicted that this sort of digital evidence “will be the thing that prosecutors will need in order to make that distinction, if they are going to try to distinguish between a miscarriage and a self-managed abortion.” In the Mississippi case, investigators secured a warrant to search the phone of Latice Fisher, a Black woman who had experienced a stillbirth at her home in 2017. To bring the charges, they pointed to data showing she had searched for abortion pills earlier in her pregnancy (there is no way to medically test whether medication abortion drugs are in woman’s system after a miscarriage or stillbirth, since the drugs are usually metabolized more quickly than the time it takes for the fetus to expel). To build the case against Fisher, investigators also relied on a test known as the “lung float test,” a controversial method for investigating allegations of infanticide that dates back to the 17th century and that has been discredited by many medical experts. Fisher’s lawyers pushed back on the use of the “float test.” After prosecutors reviewed the questions about the reliability of that method, as well as other allegations about Fisher that they found to be uncorroborated, they dropped the original indictment. When they represented the case to the grand jury with more context around the evidence, the grand jury declined to bring new charges against Fisher. Laurie Bertram Roberts, the co-founder Mississippi Reproductive Freedom Fund who assisted with Fisher’s defense, equated investigators use of Fisher’s internet search to a “thought crime.” “Let’s say at two months, I’m thinking about having an abortion and I search for stuff. And then I decide not to, and then I have a miscarriage at four and a half months,” Roberts told CNN. “That’s the risk, right? Lots of people think about having an abortion and then don’t.” Who will get targeted with prosecutions Legal and historical experts on abortion bans also expect that the bulk of enforcement will fall on marginalized communities that already face the brunt of policing – with some comparing it to the War on Drugs. “The likelihood of being caught up in this police web is going to be higher for people of color and for lower income people,” Reagan said. Oberman said that in her research of El Salvador’s extremely robust enforcement approach, there were still only around 10 convictions a year, in the face of an estimated 30,000 abortions that happen annually in the country. She said that a woman’s background is what authorities in El Salvador will look at to discern whether her pregnancy ended naturally or was purposefully terminated. “Doctors in those cases tend to suspect patients whose storyline would suggest reasons to want an abortion,” she said, such as rape victims, single mothers or those living in gang-infested territories where their personal safety is at risk. “The cases that get reported out are the ones against the poorest and most marginalized folks in society. And the cases that prosecutors move forward on are similarly those where they can tell a story about motive.” Local prosecutors who overstep the law Anti-abortion activists say they have been consistent in their approach not to aim criminal anti-abortion laws at the woman obtaining the abortion, and that the directive will remain at the forefront if Roe is overturned. “I do know we’ve seen pretty much across the board, with very few exceptions, a real commitment of lawmakers to make it clear that the woman cannot be prosecuted,” said Katie Glenn, government affairs counsel for the anti-abortion group, Americans United for Life. Jason Rapert, an Oklahoma lawmaker who sponsored a “trigger” abortion ban that will go in effect in the state if Roe is overturned, dismissed the idea that women will be targeted, calling the concerns “a new false flag that’s being thrown up just to raise an issue.” Asked how investigators will determine whether a miscarriage was natural or a medically-induced abortion, Rapert said that, “You’re also talking about the honesty of the person. “And I believe that people will be able to discern what is a miscarriage and what is not,” Rapert, who is also founder and president of the National Association of Christian Lawmakers, told CNN. While it will be up to legislators to write the anti-abortion laws that they hope will end the procedure, carrying those laws will ultimately fall to local prosecutors. A prosecutor in Texas Starr County attracted national attention this year for trying to charge a woman with murder for her self-induced abortion, despite the exemption in the relevant Texas law for the “conduct committed by the mother of the unborn child.” The prosecutor’s office said it was dropping the charges after a review the Texas law. “In Starr County, the prosecutor initially, and those that initially put the charges together, misunderstood and misapplied the law,” John Seago, Texas’ Right to Life legislative director, said. “And so that’s possible, but that’s possible with any crime.” This story has been updated following the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade on June 24.


Article: 33
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Abortions have increased significantly in states that border those with bans, new analysis finds
Author: Deidre McPhillips
Publication_Date:  Updated 3:28 PM EDT, Thu September 7, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  Abortions have increased substantially in most states where they remain legal post-Dobbs, according to a new analysis. The increases have been particularly significant in states bordering others with bans, suggesting widespread travel for care. The Guttmacher Institute, a research and policy organization focused on sexual and reproductive health that supports abortion rights, launched a new dashboard Thursday that estimates the number of abortions provided in the United States each month. The estimates are based on a regular survey of a core set of providers and broadened to the state level using a model that also factors in historical trends. The latest findings compare the number of abortions provided in the first half of 2023 to a comparable period in 2020. New Mexico and Wyoming had the largest increase in abortions, with more than three times as many provided in the first half of 2023 compared with 2020. The number of abortions also more than doubled in Kansas and South Carolina in that time. Overall, the data suggests that there were thousands more abortions in the states where the procedure remained legal in the first half of 2023 than there were nationwide during six months of 2020 — up from about 465,000 to nearly 511,000. However, the new data is based on a model with a broader margin of error than counts from earlier years, making national estimates less certain. Estimates from the Guttmacher Institute represent abortions provided within formal health care settings, including in-person clinics and telehealth. Estimates do not include data on self-managed abortions, such medication abortion provided by AidAccess. Caitlin Myers, a professor of economics at Middlebury College, told CNN that she was not particularly surprised by the increase in abortions. People seeking abortions are “pouring out” of states with restrictions, said Myers, who has researched abortion trends but was not involved in the new analysis. And “there are states where abortion access has actually expanded in the wake of Dobbs as people, in particular, have become more aware of and available to access telehealth.” “What we know is that many people are managing to get out of ban states, but that doesn’t mean it’s easy,” she said. “We are seeing an increase in abortions, but we expect they would have increased even more if it weren’t for the fact that these bans are trapping some populations, particularly poor populations, in banned states.” However, not all of the increases can be directly attributed to changes that resulted from the US Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision last year, said lsaac Maddow-Zimet, a data scientist with the Guttmacher Institute and lead for the new project. The Covid-19 pandemic may have affected individual attitudes toward pregnancy, and expanded access to medication abortion through telehealth could have affected trends, among other factors. “The need for abortion does not change because legality has shifted,” said Dr. Jamila Perritt, an ob/gyn and president and CEO of the advocacy group Physicians for Reproductive Health. “When we talk about these abortion numbers, it can’t be in a vacuum,” said Perritt, who was not involved in the new analysis. “It has to be across this larger arc of understanding the implications of restricting reproductive health care and access to that care for the last several decades.” Decisions about carrying a pregnancy to term have always been shaped by the resources that are available, she said. Access to family planning resources can play a role, as well as the economy. “As resources in our communities continue to be diminished and undermined, then carrying a child to term is not is not something that folks can do and are willing to do,” Perritt said. Earlier data from the Guttmacher Institute shows that abortions had already been on the rise between 2017 and 2020. However, many states that protected abortion access saw much larger increases in abortions between 2020 and 2023 than they did between 2017 and 2020. In Illinois, for example, the number of abortions jumped 69% between 2020 and 2023, compared with a 25% increase between 2017 and 2020. Similarly, in South Carolina, abortions increased 124% since 2020, compared with a 4% increase between 2017 and 2020. As monthly updates continue, estimates may reflect the impact of additional restrictions that been put in place since June, such as the six-week ban that was upheld by the South Carolina Supreme Court in August. An earlier analysis sponsored by The Society of Family Planning, a nonprofit focused on abortion and contraception, found that there were 25,000 fewer abortions in the US in the nine months after the Dobbs decision. Tracking abortion trends is difficult, Perritt said, and many unknown factors make it hard to predict what the rest of the year will bring. “We’re going to continue to see the impact of this policy decision forcing people from their communities to seek abortion care whatever way they can, whether it’s self managing or clinic-based care in neighboring states,” she said.



Article: 34
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Concerned about the courts, some states and universities are stockpiling abortion drugs
Author: Jen Christensen
Publication_Date: Published 5:49 PM EDT, Wed April 12, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  With an eye on the courts, a growing number of Democratic-led states are stockpiling the pills that can be used for a medication abortion, the most common form of the procedure in the US. The officials want to be prepared, in case US District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk’s decision to suspend the US Food and Drug Administration’s approval of mifepristone goes through, so medication abortions would still be available in their states for some period of time. But they’re taking different approaches to the idea. New York Gov. Kathy Hochul announced Tuesday that her state’s Department of Health would buy 150,000 doses of misoprostol, the other of the two drugs typically used in a medication abortion. Misoprostol can be used off-label for an abortion, without mifepristone, but patients often have to use more of it. It would not be covered by the court case, and if Kacsmaryk’s decision stands, the New York City’s Health Department tweeted, it will change to using this medication only.“Medication abortion continues to be available at our Sexual Health Clinics and NYC Health + Hospitals locations. Should mifepristone become unavailable, we will continue to make medication abortion accessible to all in NYC by shifting to a misoprostol-only treatment regimen,” the tweet said. The state says the 150,000 doses should represent a five-year supply of pills. “Anti-choice extremists have shown that they are not stopping at overturning Roe, and they are working to entirely dismantle our country’s reproductive health care system, including medication abortion and contraception,” Hochul said. “New York will always be a safe harbor for abortion care, and I am taking action to protect abortion access in our State and continue to lead the nation in defending the right to reproductive autonomy.” California is also stocking up on misoprostol. “While California still believes Mifepristone is central to the preferred regimen for medication abortion, the State negotiated and purchased an emergency stockpile of Misoprostol in anticipation of Friday’s ruling by far-right federal judge Matthew Kacsmaryk to ensure that California remains a safe haven for safe, affordable, and accessible reproductive care,” Gov. Gavin Newsom’s office said in a release Monday. California plans to purchase up to 2 million pills through CalRx, a state initiative set up to make drugs more affordable. The governor’s office said the state now has more than 250,000 pills on hand, which it purchased for about $100,000. California said it shared the terms of its purchase agreement with other members of the Reproductive Freedom Alliance, a nonpartisan coalition of 21 governors who are committed to protecting reproductive rights, and who might also be interested in taking such action. Another member of that alliance, Washington Gov. Jay Inslee, announced last week that his state bought a three year-supply of mifepristone, the drug at the center of Kacsmaryk’s ruling. Inslee directed the state Department of Corrections – which has a pharmacy license and is legally able to buy medications – to buy the drug last month, he said, and the shipment was delivered March 31. The University of Washington also purchased 10,000 doses. Lawmakers are introducing a bill to authorize officials to distribute or sell the medication to licensed providers throughout the state. “This Texas lawsuit is a clear and present danger to patients and providers all across the country. Washington will not sit by idly and risk the devastating consequences of inaction,” Inslee said. “Washington is a pro-choice state, and no Texas judge will order us otherwise.” In the meantime, its attorney general, Bob Ferguson, is helping lead a multistate lawsuit to protect access to mifepristone. On Friday, the same day Kacsmaryk’s ruling came down, a federal judge in Washington ordered the US not to make any changes that would restrict access to mifepristone in the territories that brought the lawsuit: 17 states and the District of Columbia. On Monday, Massachusetts Gov. Maura T. Healey announced that at her request, the University of Massachusetts and health care providers have also taken action to stockpile doses of mifepristone. The governor’s office said last week that the university bought about 15,000 doses of mifepristone, enough to cover the commonwealth for about a year, and the pills are expected to arrive this week. Local health care providers have agreed to buy more, and the government agreed to set aside $1 million to pay for those doses. The Massachusetts governor also signed an executive order confirming protections for medication abortion under existing law. “Here in Massachusetts, we are not going to let one extremist judge in Texas turn back the clock on this proven medication and restrict access to care in our state,” Healey said. “The action we are taking today protects access to mifepristone in Massachusetts and protects patients and providers from liability. In Massachusetts, we stand for civil rights and freedom. We will always protect access to reproductive health care, including medication abortion.” Danco Laboratories, the manufacturer of the brand-name version of mifepristone, says that orders for the drug have increased substantially in recent months and are significantly higher than they were at this time last year. Demand for mifepristone is up across all types of customers, including clinics, pharmacies and individual providers, said Abby Long, Danco’s director of public affairs. But Massachusetts is the only state that has requested an especially large number of pills from the company. Maine Gov. Janet Mills, who called the Texas decision “reckless” and a “fundamental assault on women’s rights,” said Monday that her administration is evaluating its options, “including procuring mifepristone if needed, to protect access to medication abortion for Maine women.” The Connecticut governor’s office said Wednesday that it is also monitoring the situation. Oregon Gov. Tina Kotek’s office said in an email Wednesday that she has directed the Oregon Health Authority to “explore all available avenues for ensuring Oregon is prepared should Mifepristone become less available. That includes evaluating the supply of Mifepristone and Misoprostol and consulting with providers to better understand the potential impact on the provision of abortion and reproductive health care and what additional support might be necessary.”


Article: 35
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: ‘We need to quit tip-toeing around the word abortion’: Rights group says the key to access is open dialogue
Author: Alaa Elassar
Publication_Date:  Published 5:01 AM EDT, Sun May 1, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  — Meg Schurr was 22 years old when she says she was sexually assaulted. A college student in New York with the dream of working in public health, Schurr’s life came to a grinding halt when she discovered she became pregnant as a result of the assault in 2014. “My pregnancy couldn’t have been more unplanned or unwanted – it resulted from an encounter that I didn’t want to have and asked to stop,” Schurr told CNN. Abortion felt like her only option. But Schurr, raised in a conservative Catholic household, was terrified of what that meant. “I was afraid to rely on just Planned Parenthood’s information – because I had been told my whole life how biased they were, and how they only provided abortion services for profit,” Schurr said, referring to the falsehoods pushed against the nonprofit sexual and reproductive health care provider that offers abortion services. But scrolling through websites of crisis pregnancy centers, which sometimes rely on misinformation to dissuade women from having abortions, only scared her more. Ultimately, Schurr’s doctor referred her to a Planned Parenthood clinic. “I was free to make my choice without hesitation or barriers just because I was lucky enough to live in the NYC metro area,” said Schurr, who now works as an administrative assistant for the reproductive rights think tank Guttmacher Institute. The freedom to make that choice is something many Americans don’t have; one people like Schurr are fighting for. Republican-majority legislatures – including those in Oklahoma, Idaho and Arizona – have passed a flurry of new restrictions on abortion in recent weeks. They range from limiting access to abortion to making it a felony to perform or attempt to perform the procedure. In many of these cases, the legislation does not provide exceptions in cases of rape, incest or medical emergency. In December, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments on one of its most important cases in decades – one that is considered to carry the future of abortion rights in the United States in the balance. A final ruling is expected in June. A decision that overturns current Supreme Court precedent on abortion rights – and one that specifically reverses the landmark 1973 Roe v. Wade opinion – could lead to new bans on abortions being implemented , and existing bans being upheld in states across the country. Proponents of such legislation often invoke religious doctrine and values, viewing abortion as tantamount to murder. But abortion rights activists say the decision whether or not to give birth is personal and enshrined in civil liberties. They also say abortion access can save lives.“Abortion is a human right,” Schurr said. “The political attacks on our fundamental right to abortion – the right to bodily autonomy, the right to chart our own course in life, the right to protect our health and well-being – are grossly unconstitutional, immoral, disgraceful and pathetic.” While protests for abortion rights often come in the form of rallies, donations and political action, there’s another weapon some are wielding: their stories. Activists say ‘Shout Your Abortion’ In 2015, after Republicans in Congress attempted to defund Planned Parenthood, Amelia Bonow took to Facebook with her own abortion story. Inspired to tell the truth, she shared her experience with no “sadness, shame or regret.” Her Facebook post was shared by fellow feminist and social justice activist Lindy West, who added the hashtag #ShoutYourAbortion. Within days, the hashtag went viral, with thousands of women nationwide adding their own stories. The goal of the social media campaign, Bonow told CNN, was to “create ways for people to share their abortion stories and normalizing abortion in culture at large.” Now, Shout Your Abortion (SYA), a nonprofit abortion rights organization co-founded by Bonow and West, shares thousands of stories from people of all ages, races and gender identities. “We are out here. We are having abortions, and we are talking about them, at whatever volume we choose,” the Shout Your Abortion website says. “It’s time for us to take back our own stories.” Despite the controversy surrounding abortion, it is a common health intervention in the United States, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Six out of 10 of all unexpected pregnancies end in abortion, WHO reported in 2021. About one in four American women will have an abortion by the age of 45, according to the Guttmacher Institute. But because abortion is considered taboo, most people don’t share their experiences, SYA says, which leads to feelings of shame, guilt and isolation. Avoiding the subject also creates an environment rife with misinformation and, ultimately, harmful legislation. That’s why SYA believes sharing stories, as well as supporting and funding clinics, is key to protecting abortion rights. “We believe that doing all these things openly, to whatever degree a person is comfortable doing so, is the way we will build a broad and uncompromising base of support for abortion access,” Bonow said. “We need to start thinking about abortion access as a community responsibility.” For some, the discussion may feel too public, too open. But women like Arielle Cohen disagree. In 2012, Cohen was a college student at SUNY Purchase – a campus leader with dreams of becoming a writer. When she became pregnant mid-semester, with only $1,000 left to last her until the end, an abortion felt like her only choice. “I wouldn’t be the person I am today if I hadn’t been able to get the money together for those two pills,” Cohen told CNN. Sharing her experience wasn’t easy, Cohen says, noting abortions are hard to get, hard to pay for and hard to talk about. “The stigma and isolation I faced made me extremely depressed,” she said. “I was embarrassed that I was depressed and felt ashamed for not knowing how to talk about it.” “I am still deeply troubled by the overwhelming stigma that I faced, that so many in my place still face,” Cohen said. Joining the #ShoutYourAbortion movement has allowed Cohen to see firsthand the impact sharing her story has had on others. “Today, I am really proud to say I had an abortion,” Cohen said. “I’m proud to know that when I spoke out about it publicly for the first time it created a domino effect where other people told me their stories for the first time. I am honored to hold those stories for others.” A long road ahead Heather Young remembers being 17 and facing the crowd outside of a clinic in Middletown, Ohio, where she had a surgical abortion. “The procedure wasn’t bad, the clinic was quiet and very clean,” Young, now 23, told CNN. “I’ll never forget the protesters outside ranting about Jesus… all the looks and stares I got as I went in.” She recalls lying on the table as a nurse held her hand, talking Young through every step of the procedure and never letting go of her once. “Even though it was a difficult period in my life, I’ll never forget the amazing people who helped me access the care I needed and deserved,” she said. Young also feels the men and women shouting outside the clinic didn’t know enough about her situation to pass judgment. As a high school student, Young says she was already struggling with mental health issues and financial problems when she became pregnant. “The guy that got me pregnant immediately switched from seemingly loving and sweet to mean,” she said. “I absolutely did not want to bring a child into the world with how young I was and definitely not with the person I laid down with,” she said. Young says she’s thankful for the kindness of the clinic staff, as well as all the women who inspired her to share her abortion story. Only by doing so, she says, will the subject become easier to address. “We need to quit tip-toeing around the word abortion,” Young said. “People need to know that people have abortions for all reasons, not just life or death situations. I was 17, scared. I would probably not be here today if it wasn’t for my mother and doctors who helped me.” The campaign Bonow and West started has made great strides since 2015. Along with sharing thousands of abortion stories, the group is now focused on raising awareness about abortion pills to help expand abortion access, especially to patients who live in states where it’s been restricted. The group has a long road ahead, with recent legislation including one measure in Oklahoma that would impose a near-total ban on abortion. But SYA says their work is more important than ever, and the fight for justice will continue, one story at a time. “I’m not ashamed that it took me years to say it,” Cohen said. “I’m not ashamed that it was hard. I’m not ashamed that I still think about all aspects of it. I’m not ashamed that it was painful. And I’m not gonna shut up about it.”


Article: 36
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Nearly two years after Texas’ six-week abortion ban, more infants are dying
Author: Isabelle Chapman
Publication_Date: Updated 11:33 AM EDT, Thu July 20, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  Texas’ abortion restrictions – some of the strictest in the country – may be fueling a sudden spike in infant mortality as women are forced to carry nonviable pregnancies to term. Some 2,200 infants died in Texas in 2022 – an increase of 227 deaths, or 11.5%, over the previous year, according to preliminary infant mortality data from the Texas Department of State Health Services that CNN obtained through a public records request. Infant deaths caused by severe genetic and birth defects rose by 21.6%. That spike reversed a nearly decade-long decline. Between 2014 and 2021, infant deaths had fallen by nearly 15%. In 2021, Texas banned abortions beyond six weeks of pregnancy. When the Supreme Court overturned federal abortion rights the following summer, a trigger law in the state banned all abortions other than those intended to protect the life of the mother. The increase in deaths could partly be explained by the fact that more babies are being born in Texas. One recent report found that in the final nine months of 2022, the state saw nearly 10,000 more births than expected prior to its abortion ban – an estimated 3% increase. But multiple obstetrician-gynecologists who focus on high-risk pregnancies told CNN that Texas’ strict abortion laws likely contributed to the uptick in infant deaths. “We all knew the infant mortality rate would go up, because many of these terminations were for pregnancies that don’t turn into healthy normal kids,” said Dr. Erika Werner, the chair of obstetrics and gynecology at Tufts Medical Center. “It’s exactly what we all were concerned about.” The issue of forcing women to carry out terminal and often high-risk pregnancies is at the core of a lawsuit filed by the Center for Reproductive Rights, with several women – who suffered difficult pregnancies or infant deaths shortly after giving birth – testifying in Travis County court this week. One witness became so emotional while testifying Wednesday that she began to vomit on the stand. After the court called a recess she explained that the reaction is a response to the emotional trauma she endured: “I vomit when there’s certain parts that happen that kind of just makes my body remember.” Another sobbed as she described feeling afraid to visit a Texas doctor after receiving an abortion out of state. A third spoke tearfully about waiting for her baby’s heart to stop beating so her doctors could provide an abortion she desperately needed. Prior to the recent abortion restrictions, Texas banned the procedure after 20 weeks. This law gave parents more time to learn crucial information about a fetus’s brain formation and organ development, which doctors begin to test for at around 15 weeks. Samantha Casiano, a plaintiff in the suit filed against Texas, wished she’d had more time to make the decision. “If I was able to get the abortion with that time, I think it would have meant a lot to me because my daughter wouldn’t have suffered,” Casiano told CNN after testifying Wednesday. ‘You have no options’ When Casiano was 20 weeks pregnant, a routine scan came back with devastating news: Her baby would be stillborn or die shortly after birth. The fetus had anencephaly, a rare birth defect that keeps the brain and skull from developing during pregnancy. Babies with this condition are often stillborn, though they sometimes live a few hours or days. Many women around the country who face the prospect choose abortion, two obstetrician-gynecologists told CNN. But Casiano lived in Texas, where state legislators had recently banned most abortions after six weeks of pregnancy. She couldn’t afford to travel out of the state for the procedure. “You have no options. You will have to go through with your pregnancy,” Casiano’s doctor told her, she claimed in the lawsuit. In March, Casiano gave birth to her daughter Halo. After gasping for air for four hours, the baby died, Casiano said during her testimony on Wednesday. “All she could do was fight to try to get air. I had to watch my daughter go from being pink to red to purple. From being warm to cold,” said Casiano. “I just kept telling myself and my baby that I’m so sorry that this had to happen to you.” Casiano and 14 others – including two doctors – are plaintiffs in the lawsuit. They allege the abortion ban has denied them or their patients access to necessary obstetrical care. The plaintiffs are asking the courts to clarify when doctors can make medical exceptions to the state’s ban. Casiano and two other plaintiffs testified Wednesday about hoping to deliver healthy babies but instead learning their lives or pregnancies were in danger. “This was just supposed to be a scan day,” Casiano told the court. “It escalated to me finding out my daughter was going to die.” Lawyers representing the state argued Wednesday that the plaintiffs’ doctors were to blame, saying they misinterpreted the law and failed to provide adequate care for such high-risk pregnancies. “Plaintiffs will not and cannot provide any evidence of any medical provider in the state of Texas being prosecuted or otherwise penalized for performance of an abortion using the emergency medical exemption,” a lawyer said during the state’s opening statement. Kylie Beaton, another plaintiff, also had to watch her baby die. Beaton, who didn’t testify this week, learned during a 20-week scan that something was wrong with her baby’s brain, according to the suit. The doctor diagnosed the fetus with alobar holoprosencephaly, a condition where the two hemispheres of the brain don’t properly divide. Babies with this condition are often stillborn or die soon after birth. Beaton’s doctor told her he couldn’t provide an abortion unless she was severely ill, or the fetus’s heart stopped. Beaton and her husband sought to obtain an abortion out of state. However, the fetus’s head was enlarged due to its condition, and the only clinic that would perform an abortion charged up to $15,000. Beaton and her husband couldn’t afford it. Instead, Beaton gave birth to a son she named Grant. The baby cried constantly, wouldn’t eat, and couldn’t be held upright for fear it would put too much pressure on his head, according to the suit. Four days later, Grant died. Maternal mortality Experts say that abortion bans in states like Texas lead to increased risk for both babies and mothers. Maternal mortality has long been a top concern for doctors and health-rights activists. Even before the Supreme Court decision, the United States had the highest maternal mortality rate among wealthy nations, one study found. Amanda Zurawski, the lawsuit’s lead plaintiff, testified Wednesday that her water broke 18 weeks into her pregnancy, putting her at high risk for a life-threatening infection. Zurawski’s baby likely wouldn’t survive. But the fetus still had a heartbeat, and so doctors said they were unable to terminate the pregnancy. She received an emergency abortion only after her condition worsened and she went into septic shock. Zurawski described during Wednesday’s hearing how her family visited the hospital, fearing it would be the last time they would see her. Zurawski has argued that had she been able to obtain an abortion, her life wouldn’t have been in jeopardy in the same way. “I blame the people who support these bans,” Zurawski said. Zurawski previously said the language in Texas’ abortion laws is “incredibly vague, and it leaves doctors grappling with what they can and cannot do, what health care they can and cannot provide.” Pregnancy is dangerous, and forcing a woman to carry a non-viable pregnancy to term is unnecessarily risky when it’s clear the baby will not survive, argued Dr. Mae-Lan Winchester, an Ohio maternal-fetal medicine specialist. “Pregnancy is one of the most dangerous things a person will ever go through,” Winchester said. “Putting yourself through that risk without any benefit of taking a baby home at the end, it’s … risking maternal morbidity and mortality for nothing.”


Article: 37
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Abortion law Q&A: How a Supreme Court opinion in a blockbuster case could impact abortion rights
Author: Tierney Sneed
Publication_Date: Updated 3:31 PM EDT, Fri June 24, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  The Supreme Court on Friday reversed Roe v. Wade, the 50-year-old court precedent enshrining a right to abortion. Doing so now gives state lawmakers the green light to aggressively limit or ban abortion. Since a draft for Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization was leaked last month, CNN readers have asked hundreds of questions about what a reversal of the Supreme Court’s abortion rights precedents would mean and how it will affect access to the procedure. The final decision released Friday closely tracked the leaked draft. We’re reading as many questions as we can and answering some of the most popular here. Is the Supreme Court actually overturning the law or merely saying the decision belongs with each state’s law? The Supreme Court overturned previous court precedent that preempted state laws banning abortion before the fetus is viable, a point around 23 weeks into the pregnancy. In overturning the Roe v. Wade and Casey v. Planned Parenthood decisions, the Supreme Court allows states to pursue bans and other restrictions on pre-viability abortion. The ruling will not have the effect of banning abortion nationwide. According to the logic expressed in the draft decision (and with the caveat that it can still be changed before the final opinion comes out), the question of abortion policy would then go to state and local lawmakers – and potentially federal lawmakers as well. Will women get arrested for having an abortion if the Supreme Court deems it illegal? An abortion-seeker’s criminal liability will depend on the abortion policies that her state put into place. Leaders of the anti-abortion movement have said in the past that women shouldn’t be prosecuted for obtaining abortion, and that criminal laws prohibiting it should be aimed at abortion providers or others who facilitate the procedure. Several states with abortion prohibitions that would go into effect with a Roe reversal have language exempting from prosecution the woman who obtained the abortion, but an abortion ban in Wyoming appears to muddle this question with its reference to the “pregnant woman” in the relevant code. There’s also nothing to stop lawmakers from passing laws calling for the prosecution of the people who sought the abortion. A state legislator in Louisiana recently proposed a bill that would charge women with murder for obtaining abortion, though that bill failed to advance. Critics of the anti-abortion movement also note that, even with Roe on the books, women have been prosecuted for pregnancies that ended in miscarriage or stillbirth. What methods do lawmakers propose to enforce these laws? What can they legally do to find out if someone is pregnant? The state abortion prohibitions that will go into effect with the Roe reversal don’t spell out specific enforcement tactics. The lengths local prosecutors will go to enforce abortion restrictions is very much an unanswered question. Before Roe, the aggressiveness of the enforcement of abortion bans often depended on the political environment, including the local environment that prosecutors were navigating. Now, some prosecutors in Democratic-leaning jurisdictions are vowing to not bring criminal charges under abortion restrictions that go into effect with the new Supreme Court opinion. The information the prosecutors will seek from health care providers in order to enforce abortion bans IS very much a concern for reproductive rights advocates. HIPAA protections that typically shield an individual’s medical information from disclosure have exemptions for certain law enforcement contexts that may come into play if Roe is overturned. Likewise, there are concerns that the data that can be obtained from an abortion-seeker’s digital devices may be used to determine if she obtained an abortion. That could include information about her menstrual cycle in a period-tracking application, some fear, or search terms she uses for internet searches. Based on the legal arguments contained in the leaked draft opinion, are there any other legal precedents and SCOTUS opinions that this ruling would overturn beyond Roe v Wade? What further rights and privileges could be at risk of being scaled back if the draft becomes the law of the land? The draft Dobbs opinion – if it became the court’s formal ruling – wouldn’t overturn other closely watched precedents in areas like same-sex marriage, contraception and interracial marriage. Those cases, like abortion, are grounded in a right to privacy that is not explicitly laid out in the Constitution, but that the court has said is implied. The Supreme Court, in handing down Roe and its successor Casey, tied the right to an abortion to the precedents in 1965’s Griswold v. Connecticut and 1967’s Loving v. Virginia, which struck down state restrictions on contraceptives and interracial marriage, respectively. The 2003 Lawrence v. Texas ruling invalidating Texas’ anti-sodomy law and the 2015 Obergefell v. Hodges decision that legalized same-sex marriage nationwide relied on Loving and Griswold as well. In the Dobbs draft that leaked, Alito went out of his way in his draft to describe Roe as distinct from those other rulings grounded in a right to privacy because, he wrote, “Abortion destroys…potential life.” “None of the other decisions cited by Roe and Casey involved the critical moral question posed by abortion. They are therefore inapposite,” Alito wrote. “They do not support the right to obtain an abortion, and by the same token, our conclusion that the Constitution does not confer such a right does not undermine them in any way.” Still, skeptics see the Roe reversal as opening the door to challenges to those other precedents, with Obergefell being the most vulnerable. Alito himself wrote a dissent to the 2015 ruling that argued that “The Constitution says nothing about a right to same-sex marriage, but the Court holds that the term ‘liberty’ in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment encompasses this right.” Conservative lawmakers and legal advocates have also argued the court’s Obergefell precedent makes the same errors the court made in enshrining abortion rights. The Mississippi law at issue bans abortion starting from 15 weeks after the last menstrual period. If the Supreme Court allows this law to stand, will it then be legal to ban abortion at earlier points in pregnancy? Will it be possible for states to ban medication-induced first-trimester abortions, which are the most common type? Many states seem poised to do so. If the draft opinion that was leaked was adopted, not only would the Mississippi 15-week ban be upheld, but states – and potentially the federal government – would be allowed to ban abortion earlier in the pregnancy, including medication-induced first trimester abortions. More than a dozen states have so-called “trigger laws,” under which bans on abortion would be implemented if the Supreme Court overturns Roe, and several more have other types of bans that could go into effect with the reversal of previous Supreme Court precedent. But until the court issues its final opinion, we won’t know for sure how aggressively states will be allowed to restrict abortion under the court’s new precedent. In the event of rape or incest or even underage pregnancy of say 14 years old, where does the law lie for these individuals if Roe vs Wade is overturned? If Roe is overturned, exemptions in abortion bans for rape, incest or health of the mother will vary state by state. In the wave of abortion limits that have been passed by state legislatures recently in anticipation of the Supreme Court’s ruling, only a few of the proposals included exemptions for rape and incest. It’s a question lawmakers will likely revisit once the Supreme Court’s ruling, assuming it overturns Roe, is handed down. While previewing plans to call a special legislative session once the opinion is issued, Republican South Carolina Gov. Henry McMaster said he opposed rape or incest exemptions. The six-week ban he signed into law last year – which is currently blocked by court order – included those exemptions. On the flip side, Arkansas Republican Gov. Asa Hutchinson told CNN this May that he supported adding rape and incest exemptions in the trigger law currently on the books in the state. How are in vitro fertilizations defined? If a state defines the fertilized egg as a human with rights, then if a doctor fertilizes four eggs, but does [not] implant all four in a woman, is that homicide? What a Roe reversal would mean for fertility treatments is a major uncertainty. Physicians and legal experts in the field are currently grappling with state abortion policies frame their laws around the moment of fertilization, when the egg has united with the sperm. Some of those state laws have language that would appear to exempt the disposal of unused embryos created for IVF, but that language doesn’t necessarily exempt the process of selective reduction, when a woman whose fertility treatments lead to a multiple pregnancy has one or more of those fetuses terminated to protect the viability of the other fetuses and/or the health of the mother. More broadly, fertility law experts raise concerns about how a Roe reversal will embolden lawmakers to regulate IVF procedures – which have been largely shielded from the abortion debate because of the protections of Roe. If the current heavily conservative Supreme Court can overturn Roe v. Wade, that’s been on the books for decades, what’s to stop a future heavily liberal court from overturning this current anti-Roe v. Wade decision in say, 20 years from now? Technically, there’s nothing to stop a Supreme Court from revisiting abortion precedent and a court with a more liberal makeup may very well do so. However, one reason that a future liberal Supreme Court majority might be disinclined to change a major precedent again is if those justices feel more loyalty to the principle of stare decisis – the legal principle that discourages overturning precedent unless certain conditions are met – than the loyalty that has been shown by the conservative majority poised to reverse Roe. This respect for precedence, for instance, is why Chief Justice John Roberts voted in 2020 to strike down a Louisiana abortion clinic regulation, after he dissented in a 2016 case where the majority struck down a similar Texas law. Can the right to an abortion be codified by a national vote? Not directly. A constitutional amendment could be enacted to extend that right. But the process of amending US Constitution begins with a proposal that has the support of either two-thirds of both Houses of Congress, or with a convention called for by two-thirds of the states. Ratification of an amendment requires the support of three-fourths of state legislatures or three-fourths of conventions in each state. Why does the currently Democrat-controlled legislature not pass a federal law making abortion legal? This would make the SCOTUS decision a non issue. Democrats currently lack the votes to dismantle the Senate filibuster, a 60-vote procedural mechanism that Republicans can use to block federal abortion rights legislation – so as long as 40 senators oppose abortion rights. But it’s worth noting that the Women’s Health Protection Act – a bill would codify and expand upon Roe – failed 49-51 when it was voted on in May in the Senate, meaning that, even without the filibuster, it would have not become law. There are also legal questions about whether it would be constitutional for federal lawmakers to enact a nationwide ban. The late Justice Antonin Scalia stressed in his legal writings about abortion that the policy-decisions belonged in the hands of individual states, while expressing skepticism that Congress has the constitutional authority to regulate the procedure. Friday, Alito used notably open-ended language that doesn’t limit the provenance of abortion legislation to state lawmakers.Can anti-abortion states prevent women from crossing state lines to get an abortion in another state? It worries me that states could enact further laws restricting women the choice to leave the state to have an abortion. Anti-abortion state lawmakers have already expressed interest in regulating conduct around abortion that happens outside of their borders. Perhaps the most aggressive example is a failed bill in Missouri that would have extended its abortion laws to out-of-state abortions if the mother is a Missouri resident or if “Sexual intercourse occurred within this state and the child may have been conceived by that act of intercourse.” That proposal hasn’t advanced, but there are other examples of this tactic that might move forward in the future. A handful of Texas lawmakers, for instance, are calling for penalties for companies that cover the costs for employees who travel out of state to obtain abortions. The legal authority that state lawmakers have to reach beyond state lines is very much an open question and the topic of a coming law review article that provides more information about the relevant precedents. Is it possible that women and men who are pro-choice could send abortion pills to women in other states with draconian anti-abortion laws? With medication abortion – a two pill regimen that terminates a pregnancy – becoming the method used in a majority of abortions performed nationwide, red states have already been cracking down on the mailing of abortion pills and on administering the pills without an in-person visit with a physician. These state laws started gaining steam after the FDA allowed for the mailing of abortion pills in a pandemic-related move that has now been made permanent. If Roe is overturned, medication abortion will be covered by abortion bans and we might see other types of proposals to limit medication abortion. But how to enforce these restrictions on mailing abortion pills is another question anti-abortion lawmakers are still working through. Texas last year updated its previously existing ban on mailing abortion pills to make it the type of crime that would warrant extradition. Blue states have countered with measures that would prohibit their state authorities from cooperating with such extradition requests. There are also international sources from which women in anti-abortion states may seek delivery of medication abortion.


Article: 38
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Your phone could be used against you in an abortion case
Author: Zachary B. Wolf
Publication_Date: Published 8:05 AM EDT, Sat July 16, 2022
Article_Content:CNN  —  Some of the most horrible predictions about a post-Roe v. Wade America are coming true as women contend with the new reality: The story of a 10-year-old rape victim who had to be transported from Ohio to Indiana for an abortion was too much for some to believe. It’s true. Indiana’s state government, by the way, is in the process of moving to severely limit abortion services. Bills in Congress to guarantee women’s rights to travel across state lines for medical care were blocked by Republicans in the Senate. That seeking an abortion could break the law means people in states that restrict abortion must consider the trail of evidence they leave behind when they use their phones and computers as they look to obtain medical care. Google searches, location data and communications could all be used in an abortion prosecution; they’re used every day in American courtrooms for other cases. CNN’s report about how personal data could be used to enforce anti-abortion laws outlined the lengths to which state authorities could go to enforce new laws. I talked to Albert Fox Cahn, a lawyer and founder of the Surveillance Technology Oversight Project, about what’s happening, what could conceivably happen and how laws should be changed to protect people’s data privacy. Our phone conversation, edited lightly for flow, is below. What exactly do companies know about you? WHAT MATTERS: What do companies and apps know about you, and what can they put together from that? CAHN: Increasingly, tech companies know every place we go, everything we’ve searched for online and almost every moment of how our lives are spent. It is an incredibly invasive and intimate way to reconstruct our lives, whether that’s to figure out what advertisers want to sell us or increasingly for police to try to investigate us. How could this data be used in states where abortion is illegal? WHAT MATTERS: The fear is this information could be used in abortion prosecutions, if those start happening. How is it currently used in the justice system? CAHN: In 2022, electronic surveillance and device searches are an everyday part of American policing. Officers submit warrants to Google by the tens of thousands. … Nearly every app on our phone is collecting information that can potentially be used. And even companies like Apple, which spend millions of dollars advertising privacy protections, oftentimes are completely unable to protect their users if they get a court order. With abortion prosecutions, we’re not afraid of something unprecedented. We’re afraid of something that is already happening, simply accelerated, and we already see examples of pregnant people being targeted by police and prosecutors because of electronic information. We’re talking about everything on your phone WHAT MATTERS: It seems to me like communications – text messages and phone calls – would be a bigger tool for prosecutors if they were going after somebody seeking an abortion or somebody helping facilitate one. Is that a separate issue, or is that wrapped up into this? CAHN: Oh, that’s all part of a threat modeling here. When we look at the constellation of risks, some of it comes from scraping massive amounts of data from Google, from social media companies and even from Apple. But a large part of it is simply looking at the text messages we send. We continue to see people being reported to police by family, by friends, for seeking abortion services. It’s quite common in American courtrooms to see emails, text messages, even encrypted messages being read back into the transcript to be used against us. Encrypting your communications can help reduce the risk, but you know, using the most secure platforms like Signal and also setting up messages to automatically delete is an even more effective safeguard. What will spark an abortion investigation? WHAT MATTERS: From your report, I learned about the importance of non-state actors. You talked about family members informing on people and activists tracking license plates. It’s not my impression that in states that ban abortion there will be an abortion police out there actively searching for this. It takes these activist groups to tee it up. Is that right? Or is that a misread? CAHN: I think that it is both. So I think that’s correct today, but I fear that we will see designated abortion policing units in the future. Certainly during Roe, even in its waning days, we saw states relying extensively on private bounty hunters and activists to enforce abortion bans. Famously in the case of SB 8 in Texas, the state turned to private companies, because it was unconstitutional under Roe for them to engage in that sort of anti-abortion policing themselves. But it’s unclear in a world where the police can prosecute those seeking care directly whether we’ll see less of a focus on those private bounty hunters and private activist groups. Will Google’s remedy help? WHAT MATTERS: Google has said it will soon begin to delete data for visits to abortion clinics and health care locations. Is that a step in the right direction? Is that something to be celebrated, or is it nothing at all? CAHN: This is far too little, far too late. Google has been warned that the way they are storing data poses a threat to civil rights for years. And while we are all talking about the threat to abortion care right now, this also poses a threat to political protest, it poses a threat to freedom of religion, freedom of assembly – almost any right that we use. In fact, almost any right that we exercise by coming together in a single place can be forever chilled by these sorts of warrants. And it’s not hypothetical. We saw Minneapolis police using a geofence warrant during Black Lives Matter protests in 2020. Even by its own terms, Google’s approach isn’t enough. First off, for people who are providing abortion medication and services in states where it’s illegal, they’re not about to publicize to Google that they qualify as a health care facility. So Google wouldn’t even know to redact the information from that location. And then second of all, even if they are redacting information from the clinic itself, you can still gain a lot of information by tracking someone’s movements in other areas, particularly if people are traveling out of state long distances. So rather than saying that we should only have our privacy in select locations, Google should say that every place should be a safe place. Will Biden’s remedy help? WHAT MATTERS: President Joe Biden signed an executive order intended to protect abortion access, and the Federal Trade Commission has issued a warning to tech companies to protect data. Is that a step in the right direction? CAHN: It is. I’d like to see much more aggressive action by the Biden administration. We should be stripping federal law enforcement funds from police departments that abuse these tools to target abortion access – particularly right now, we see a lot of concern about how abortion laws are going to be enforced across state lines. With pregnant people going to states like New York and Illinois to find care, there’s going to be a rush by anti-choice states to track those movements using geofence warrants, and to try to use truly unprecedented law to enforce their abortion bans across state lines. The President has a lot more power to disrupt this sort of activity, whether it’s adding conditions to DOJ grants under the Byrne Discretionary Grant Program, whether it’s an executive order that this interferes with the right to travel, whether it’s suspending membership in Joint Terrorism Task Forces and other federal-state information sharing agreements for any agency that does this. You know, there are huge pots of money at the federal level, funding state and local police, and none of that money should be funding attacks on abortion access. There ought to be a law. What should it do? WHAT MATTERS: The idea that there’s a need for a digital privacy law is not new. How will overturning Roe affect what should go into that law? And are you hopeful that there will be a new law in the near future? CAHN: I think there will be many laws that go far further than would have seemed possible not long ago, but they won’t be federal. They’ll be state and local. We’ve seen this stalemate on privacy for years at the federal level, and layering on the impact that these protections have for abortion will only polarize it further. But we can see states like New York poised to enact really groundbreaking protections. We have the first bill pending in the country that will ban all geofence warrants, keyword warrants and police purchases of similar data. And that bill has been gaining momentum, and I expect will pass either in a special session later this year or early next year. We also could see states enacting what I think will be crucial protection against data collection by companies. Companies get sued for negligence if they have poor cybersecurity practices, and they should get sued for negligence if they store data in a way that puts their users at risk of a geofence warrant, keyword warrant or a similar digital dragnet. There are lots of companies – like Apple for example, which has many shortcomings in its privacy protections, but it cannot be forced to comply with a geofence warrant because it does not store its data in that format. If we have a state law that allows the public to sue when companies store data in this way, we can effectively outlaw geofence warrants nationwide. Laws in one state can affect companies everywhere WHAT MATTERS: Why would a law in New York or California help somebody in Texas or Mississippi? CAHN: Well, first off because of interstate information-sharing agreements, police in one state routinely are helping police in another. It’s not hard to imagine how anti-choice officers in New York or California could facilitate out-of-state prosecutions. But on top of that, we see that where states impose additional privacy protections, rather than creating 50 different versions of the products, companies usually comply with the most stringent privacy protection nationwide. And so if we make it so that it’s illegal for Google and Uber and Lyft to save their data in a way which is vulnerable to a geofence warrant, that won’t just benefit New Yorkers. That will likely become a new national standard. Aren’t women still better off in a more technologically advanced world? WHAT MATTERS: When I wrote a story about the reality for American women before Roe v. Wade, I talked to one author who said the big difference in the post-Roe world is technology. Women will have access to information on the internet in a way that they never did before. They will be able to openly communicate with people who provide abortion services in other places. They’ll be able to contact groups that might send them medication. On balance, won’t technology help women in this new reality? CAHN: No, I think it’s much more complicated. I think that the technological playing field will be deeply unbalanced. We know that more privileged, more wealthy abortion seekers are much less likely to be targeted by police in any case. I can easily see a world in which wealthier individuals are able to use all of these tools to circumvent state bans and get care, while the low-income BIPOC (Black, Indigenous and people of color) individuals are most likely to be targeted. The pregnant people who are most likely to face police scrutiny lack the resources to get those same benefits. I think prior to Roe, theoretically, nearly any pregnant person could travel out of state to get abortion care if they lived in a state where it was illegal, but it was wealthy, White cis women who work, overwhelmingly. I fear that history will repeat itself. And as far as internet access to medically accurate information about abortion, I think we’re going to see a massive effort to try to censor information about abortion. … There’ll be broad efforts to use the filtering ecosystem that is mandated for schools and prolifically in public libraries to try to ban this content. And really much of the internet censorship infrastructure we’ve built up over decades in the name of protecting children will now be weaponized in service of the so-called “unborn children.” What should you do differently on your phone? WHAT MATTERS: What’s one thing everybody should do right now with their phones to protect themselves? CAHN: It’s a different answer for every person. Your threat model. What is your biggest risk? What are the things that you can do most easily – and really working through that can change over time. It can mean everything from switching only to encrypted messages, making sure all of your messages delete after a short time, disabling any location tracking to the extent you can. Do privacy checkups for all of your apps, and minimizing the data retention. But short of putting your phone in a Faraday bag and walking around with a Guy Fawkes mask on, there’s not much that individuals can do to truly eliminate every form of tracking. And so it becomes a question of what is the proportional risk; what is the proportional response? And what is the way that you can not just help yourself and help people in your community, but then help push for the changes we need to help everyone? Because I always fear that it’s going to be through users least at risk who have the resources to deploy the most sophisticated protections. One more thing: facial recognition WHAT MATTERS: Is there anything I missed? CAHN: I don’t think we talked about facial recognition or biometric stuff. So just you know, we continue to be very fearful that activists and law enforcement can monitor clinic entrances using automated license plate readers, using facial recognition, using other forms of biometric surveillance. These tools have truly gotten out of control. And we continue to call for a clear categorical ban on them nationwide, because while this is one of the most heartbreaking ways that we’ll see them used, it is far from the only one.


Article: 39
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Voters deliver ringing endorsement of abortion rights on midterm ballot initiatives across the US
Author: Veronica Stracqualursi, Devan Cole and Paul LeBlanc
Publication_Date: Updated 12:53 PM EST, Wed November 9, 2022
Article_Content:  Washington CNN  — 
Voters in key states on Tuesday made their support for abortion rights clear, affirming a months-long push by Democrats to act on a number of ballot measures in the wake of the Supreme Court’s decision overturning Roe v. Wade. Several states moved to enshrine abortion protections in their constitutions and others rejected proposals to limit abortion access or criminalize doctors in some cases. Democratic lawmakers and organizers cast the midterm elections as a referendum on Republican efforts to limit women’s choices, and the notable electoral reaction could serve as a warning sign for future GOP efforts to restrict the procedure at the state-level. Voters affirmed abortion rights in all five states with amendments, CNN projects Voters approved ballot measures in California, Michigan and Vermont to protect abortion rights, according to CNN projections. Amendments that would have further restricted abortion rights in Kentucky and Montana were both rejected.About 27% of voters cited abortion as the issue most important to them, according to the preliminary results of the national and state exit polls conducted for CNN and other news networks by Edison Research. The results also showed that when it comes to the issue, roughly half of voters said they trusted Democratic candidates, compared with more than 4 in 10 voters who said they trusted Republican candidates. “This fall, Roe is on the ballot,” President Joe Biden declared in a defiant speech from the White House just hours after the Supreme Court’s ruling earlier this year. While CNN projected some anti-abortion Republicans will win their races, voters in five states moved to affirm abortion rights. Here’s a running list of what voters decided on Election Day. Montana rejects abortion measure that would allow criminal penalties on health care providers Voters in Montana rejected on Tuesday proposed legislation that would have imposed criminal penalties on health care providers who do not act to preserve the life of infants born during the course of an abortion, CNN projects. LR-131, if adopted, would have provided that an infant “born alive” – defined as an infant “at any stage of development” who breathes, has a beating heart or definite movement of voluntary muscles after expulsion or extraction – be treated as a legal person entitled to medical treatment. Montana decides against further restricting abortion, CNN projects Montana voters rejected a ballot measure that would require medical care for infants born alive, including after an abortion, according to a CNN projection. As of Wednesday evening, more than 448,000 had voted on the amendment, with the majority against. A health care provider who violated the proposed law would have been guilty of a felony and could have faced up to 20 years in state prison and/or a fine of up to $50,000. It would have also mandated that health care providers and clinics report “a failure to comply with the requirements” to law enforcement. Montana currently prohibits abortions past viability – “the ability of a fetus to live outside the mother’s womb” – except to save the life or health of the woman. Last year, the state’s Republican-led legislature passed the bill that put the referendum on the ballot. Backers of the measure said such a law was necessary to protect infants born during an abortion attempt, while opponents said the bill wasn’t needed because there are laws in place that require care to be given. Hillary-Anne Crosby, the campaign coordinator and communications lead for Compassion for Montana Families, previously said LR-131 “zeroes in on families that are having complications in the labor and delivery room, such as lethal fetal abnormalities.” “It’s not uncommon for families to make the decision to induce labor so that they can hold their infant for a few minutes, maybe have family come in and be able to meet their new family member for the few moments that they are alive, and LR-131 throws a wrench in that being a viable option to them without the health care workers facing a felony,” she previously told CNN. Kentucky rejects proposal that would have further restricted abortion rights Kentucky voters on Tuesday rejected a proposal to amend the state’s constitution to say that it does not “secure or protect a right” to abortion or the funding of abortion, CNN projects. The ballot question voters faced read: “Are you in favor of amending the Constitution of Kentucky by creating a new Section of the Constitution to be numbered Section 26A to state as follows: To protect human life, nothing in this Constitution shall be construed to secure or protect a right to abortion or require the funding of abortion?” Kentucky’s “trigger law,” which bans most abortions at all stages of pregnancy, and a law banning abortion after roughly six weeks of pregnancy have been allowed to be enforced temporarily while a lawsuit challenging the laws continues. Kentucky Right to Life executive director Addia Wuchner, who chairs the Yes for Life Alliance, which supported Amendment 2, previously said voting “yes” would “ensure there’s no false interpretation of the constitution.” Kentucky decides not to further restrict abortion rights, CNN projects Kentucky voted against amending the state constitution to say it does not "secure or protect a right" to an abortion or funding of abortion, according to a CNN projection. As of Tuesday morning, more than 1.4 million had voted on the amendment, with the majority against. Without the amendment, “instead of the lawmakers who duly reflect the people’s will, we would end up with the abortion industry taking each law back into court,” Wuchner said. Tamarra Wieder, the Kentucky state director for Planned Parenthood Alliance Advocates, had said passing the amendment would “open the door to more attacks on abortion access,” but rejecting it would allow abortion rights advocates to “continue to fight back” against the six-week ban and the trigger ban. If adopted, the measure would have gone into effect immediately once the results of the election are certified by the State Board of Elections. Michigan enshrines abortion rights Michigan voters on Tuesday voted to enshrine abortion rights in the state’s constitution, a move that will help block a decades-old abortion ban from taking effect, CNN projects. The passage of ballot Proposal 3 amends the Michigan constitution to establish an “individual right to reproductive freedom, including right to make and carry out all decisions about pregnancy.” Michigan has a 1931 law that essentially bans abortion in the state, but that law is being blocked by the courts. The passage of the ballot proposal helps prevent the ban from taking effect. The amendment allows the state to regulate abortion after fetal viability, except if needed to protect a patient’s life or physical or mental health. It also bars the state from prosecuting an individual for having an abortion or miscarriage or from prosecuting someone who assists a pregnant person in “exercising rights established by this amendment.” Michigan surpasses 2018 turnout to guarantee right to an abortion Michigan voted to protect abortion access in the state constitution, according to a CNN projection, preventing a 1931 law banning abortion from taking effect. More Michiganders have voted on the amendment than the total number of people who participated in the 2018 midterm election. The proposal had to overcome legal challenges to be included on the ballot, with the Michigan Supreme Court ordering officials in September to include the question on ballots in a 5-2 ruling. “We are energized and motivated now more than ever to restore the protections that were lost under Roe,” Darci McConnell, a spokesperson for Reproductive Freedom for All, a group backing the effort, said in a statement after the ruling. Michigan Republicans had blasted the court’s decision, along with another on a voting rights ballot proposal. “Despite the court ruling, these measures remain too extreme for Michigan, and we are certain they will be handily defeated at the ballot box in November,” Elizabeth Giannone, deputy communications director for the state party, predicted in a statement earlier this year. California voters put abortion rights in state constitution The California Constitution will protect the right to an abortion after residents on Tuesday passed a ballot initiative to enshrine the right in the state’s governing document, CNN projects. California votes to protect abortion rights, CNN projects California voted to include reproductive rights in the state constitution, according to a CNN projection. As of Thursday evening, more than 9.4 million Californians had voted on the amendment, with the majority in support. Currently, the state constitution guarantees a right to privacy, which the California Supreme Court has ruled includes the right to have an abortion. In May, following the leak of the US Supreme Court’s draft opinion to overturn Roe v. Wade, California Democratic leaders Gov. Gavin Newsom, state Senate President Pro Tempore Toni Atkins and state Assembly Speaker Anthony Rendon said in a statement that they would propose an amendment “so that there is no doubt as to the right to abortion in this state.” The Democratic-controlled state legislature in June approved putting the amendment on the November ballot. “Proposition 1 ensures that no matter what the future legislature looks like, what the future governor looks like, that people in California have a constitutional protection that explicitly ensures the state won’t interfere with their right to reproductive freedom,” Jodi Hicks, the head of Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California and co-chair of the Yes on Prop 1 campaign, previously told CNN. The California Family Council had said the proposed amendment is an “extreme and costly proposal that does nothing to advance women’s health.” And the California Catholic Conference, which opposes Proposition 1, called it a “misleading ballot measure that allows unlimited late-term abortions – for any reason, at any time, even moments before birth, paid for by tax dollars.” The Yes on Prop 1 campaign previously said the proposal would not change “existing state constitutional protections and law, which provide for the right to choose an abortion prior to viability or to protect the pregnant person’s life or health.” The measure goes into effect the fifth day after the vote is certified. Vermont voters back abortion rights Voters in Vermont on Tuesday approved an amendment to the state’s constitution that abortion rights supporters say will protect “every person’s right to make their own reproductive decisions,” including about pregnancies, abortion and birth control, CNN projects. The Vermont Constitution will now be amended to read: “That an individual’s right to personal reproductive autonomy is central to the liberty and dignity to determine one’s own life course and shall not be denied or infringed unless justified by a compelling State interest achieved by the least restrictive means.” Abortion is currently legal at all stages of pregnancy in Vermont. The proposed amendment was first brought by the Vermont Legislature in 2019. Vermont for Reproductive Liberty Ballot Committee, the coalition that backed Article 22, had previously said state-level protections “are vital to safeguarding access” now that the US Supreme Court has overturned Roe v. Wade. “It would mean that abortion access has been codified in the state constitution, and really the most important part of that is that it’s protected long-term, and it means that access is going to be there, no matter what our politicians do,” Sam Donnelly, the campaign manager for the coalition, previously told CNN. Vermont surpasses 2018 turnout to vote to guarantee right to abortion More voters in Vermont cast their ballots to safeguard abortion access in the state constitution than the total number of people who participated in the 2018 midterm election. Both supporters and opponents of Article 22 have said its adoption means that Vermont lawmakers will be unable to pass any limitations or regulations on abortion in the future because it would then be deemed unconstitutional. Mary Beerworth, the executive director of the Vermont Right to Life Committee, which opposes the amendment, had said the proposal goes “way, way further” than codifying abortion rights into the state constitution. “It will be about a vast range of anything that pertains to your personal reproductive autonomy, from surrogacy, three-parent embryo, designer babies, minors possibly accessing the hormone blockers for transgender surgery without their parents’ knowledge or consent,” she previously told CNN. “It’s opening a whole new world here if it passes.”


Article: 40
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: How the Supreme Court recalibrated the abortion debate in just 3 words
Author: Eliott C. McLaughlin
Publication_Date:Updated 11:02 AM EDT, Sun July 17, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  It’s not just that US Supreme Court majorities upheld Mississippi’s 15-week abortion ban and overturned Roe v. Wade. The opinion also skewed the crux of the conversation going forward – with just three words. “Unborn human being” is the term Associate Justice Samuel Alito adopted from the Mississippi statute, thereby replacing the key phrase in the landmark 1973 Roe ruling that spelled out a constitutional right to abortion: “potential life.” It may seem like a semantic argument. Experts say it’s anything but. Alito didn’t write God or Christianity or Bible anywhere in the opinion, but his justification is a veiled “religious narrative,” said Rebecca Todd Peters, a religious studies professor at Elon University. By co-opting the language in Mississippi’s law in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the majority opinion gives credence to the notion – embraced largely by the religious right – that life begins at fertilization, she said. The ruling has already emboldened several states to ban and criminalize the medical procedure in almost all circumstances. “That is an enormous shift,” Peters said. “It erases whole groups of people who have different religious beliefs.” Peters, who is ordained in the Presbyterian Church, isn’t merely speaking about Christians. When a zygote, embryo or fetus becomes a human being is far from an objective determination within or across any religions. There is no scientific gauge: Doctors tend to focus on viability, which experts believe to be around 23 weeks, though health outcomes improve the longer the gestational period. Various religions have relied on a range of wayposts, including fertilization, quickening (when the mother feels the fetus moving), when the embryo develops a heartbeat, ensoulment and birth. Confounding matters is that, just like in Christian sects, there are chasms of disagreement among other religions – not only regarding personhood but also a woman’s bodily autonomy – making holy texts a troublesome barometer for whether abortion should be outlawed. Worse, said Peters, is that by co-opting the term, “unborn human being,” it signals “which religious voices get authority and power in our country.” Though opponents of legalized abortion often paint women who undergo abortions as heathens, a strong majority – more than 6 in 10 – identified as women of faith in a 2014 poll, said Peters, who is on sabbatical for a research project titled, “Abortion and Religion: Listening to Women.” “There are a whole lot more who support bodily autonomy for mothers to make decisions about life and how many children they have and who they have them with and how to shape their future with or without partners,” Peters said. “We’ve allowed a minority religious belief to curtail the rights of the majority of women in the country. I feel like I’m in the middle of a dystopian novel.” More than 50 religious groups sought to make this clear to the high court last year, filing a friend-of-the-court brief explaining religious traditions have various views of when life begins, affirm a woman’s “moral right” to decide when to terminate pregnancy and stand by “the importance of ensuring reproductive choice for women in marginalized communities who are disproportionately harmed by the ban.” “By prohibiting abortions beyond 15 weeks gestation, the Ban precludes women from making that choice in accordance with their own moral, spiritual, and religious beliefs, which this Court has recognized as a constitutional right,” the brief said. The attitude that a woman would have to justify her decision to others is “rooted in religion,” Peters said. It robs women of their autonomy and espouses a narrow, archaic view of Christianity that has long been malappropriated to dictate “women are to be subservient and meant to be child bearers,” she said. Religions and religious people vary widely A Gallup poll in May – before Roe’s reversal – found 55% of Americans identified as “pro-choice,” while 39% said they’re “pro-life.” Only 13% of Americans said abortions should be prohibited across the board, and 53% said abortions should be legal in most or all circumstances, Gallup reported. Breaking the percentages down by dogma demonstrates only a handful of groups – Jehovah’s Witnesses (68%), Mormons (66%) White evangelical Protestants (65%), Hispanic Protestants (58%) and Hispanic Catholics (52%) – count a majority of members as opposing abortion, the nonprofit Public Religion Research Institute found in 2018. Catholics have long driven the debate on abortion – and five Catholics and a justice who was raised Catholic upheld Mississippi’s 15-week ban – even as the institute’s data suggests 52% of White Catholics are OK with legal abortion. (It is worth noting Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor broke with her fellow Catholics in Dobbs.) Here is a look at support for legal abortion in most or all cases among other religions, per the institute: Muslims – 51% Orthodox Christian – 54% Black Protestants – 56% White mainline Protestants – 59% Hindus – 62% Buddhists – 69% Jewish people – 70% And 87% of agnostics and 97% of atheists expressed support for abortion in all or most cases, the Pew Research Center reported this year. Those numbers are black and white, of course, but religions and their adherents are not, so to cast attitudes as “for” or “against” disappears nuance from the equation. There are other factors to consider, experts say. Islamic scholars, for instance, took a more liberal stance in premodern times, said UCLA law professor Khaled Abou El Fadl, an Islamic jurist who holds a doctorate in Islamic law from Princeton University. There was a time when women so often miscarried in the first trimester that some jurists didn’t regard the fetus as a full human being, while others debated when the soul enters the fetus – somewhere between 40 and 120 days, the professor said. Still, there were some conservative-minded jurists who felt the “potentiality of life” should always be protected, he said. The conversation began to shift during colonialism, with the influence of French law and the creation of state governments, Abou El Fadl said. “It’s interesting because the medieval debate in Islamic law was about when the soul enters the body. We don’t have an Islamic text on that – nothing in the Quran, nothing in the inherited traditions of the Prophet Muhammad that answers the question,” he said, explaining that once “the state became much larger in everyone’s life and the whole idea (arises) that the state has the right to regulate and enforce morality,” most if not all Muslim nations banned abortion except to save the mother’s life. Judaism takes a similar position on allowing abortion to save the mother. “Judaism is a religion that is based on law,” and there are no religious figures – no popes or imams – who can allow something Jewish law prohibits, said Dr. Daniel Eisenberg, an expert in Jewish medical ethics and a radiologist at Einstein Medical Center Philadelphia. The issue of when life begins is not a Jewish concept, he said. The question is: When does Jewish law protect life? The general consensus is when it’s necessary to protect a mother’s life. Outside that, “the range of opinions is from a Biblically forbidden form of murder without being a capital offense to being a rabbinic prohibition that is very serious but not murder.” Abortion is never a capital offense in Jewish law, he said. “A fetus is going to become a full-fledged human being, but it is not considered to be a full-fledged human being until it is born. But not being a human being does not mean it’s nothing,” said Eisenberg, who has spent years studying and lecturing on the Talmud and Jewish law. “The concept is that the fetus is a person with slightly less protection than a full-fledged human being, than the mother. … When it is a threat to the mother, it is subordinate.” There is no official position in Buddhism, and Buddhist scholars vary, with some saying the fetus is a human at fertilization and various others saying personhood begins weeks or even five months later, author and lay dharma teacher Sallie Jiko Tisdale wrote last year in the quarterly, Tricycle: The Buddhist Review. “Nevertheless, the conclusion of orthodox Buddhist scholars has long been that a human being appears at the moment of conception. Because human birth is a rare and precious gift, to deprive a being of the opportunity is a grave mistake,” she wrote. Hindu teachings elevate the life of the mother and support a ban on abortion except to save her life, experts say. “Abortion deliberately disrupts the process of reincarnation and kills an innocent human being … and imposes serious karmic burdens on its agent,” wrote Dr. Kiarash Aramesh, director of the James F. Drane Bioethics Institute at Edinboro University, in 2019. “The perspective of Hinduism is a very pro-life one, emphasizing Ahimsa (not causing harm to living creatures) and its intrinsic reverence for life.” Across all religions, scholars can further diverge when the issues of birth defects, rape, incest and the mother’s mental health are at play. Older texts provide little guidance on the latter because sensitivity to mental health is a relatively new concentration in medicine, experts say. Many Jewish scholars see the law as condoning abortion if the mother exhibits suicidal ideation, Eisenberg said. Some Islamic scholars feel suicide is a choice, Abou El Fadl said, but as a jurist, he understands many who contemplate suicide feel they have no choice and he’d consider each case on its own merits. As for rape and incest, Islamic scholars are split, he said, but he points out even in Egypt, where abortion is forbidden in cases of rape and incest, it’s rarely if ever prosecuted. In Judaism, the law’s interpretations are so varied on rape and incest, Eisenberg suggested it warranted a news article to itself. Abortion following the detection of birth defects, lethal or otherwise, also divides rabbis, he said, but he points out that despite the American debate’s focus on rape, incest and birth defects, those reasons prompt only a small fraction of abortion procedures. Most commonly, women seek abortion because a child would disrupt their lives or because they cannot afford a baby – reasons, Eisenberg said, traditional Jewish law would never condone. As the polling suggests, certain groups and branches of the faith hold different views. Elsewhere on the spectrum is the politically progressive Reform Judaism – the country’s largest denomination, accounting for a third of American Jews – which holds a mother maintains total autonomy when deciding whether to terminate a pregnancy. ‘They also believe God forgives sins’ For Peters, the debate should revolve around a woman’s right to control her fate, she said. As she cowrote in a January column, “It often seems religion is not even a relevant statistical data point in understanding who gets abortions. In fact, 62 percent of women who have abortions identify as women of faith. Religiously identified women, with the notable exception of evangelical women, have abortions at virtually the same rate as their representation in the population.” Yet proponents of outlawing abortion continue to perpetuate a false binary, “this sort of popular perception that religion is against abortion and all the people for abortion are secular – and that is just not true at all,” she said. “It’s a dangerous narrative that has shaped our culture’s understanding of abortion.” Peters has interviewed dozens of women for “Abortion and Religion: Listening to Women,” including those who opposed abortion rights before terminating their own pregnancies. She’s found women often have abortions out of a love they feel coincides with their religions, she said. The debate is so “stigmatized and mean-spirited” and women are stereotyped and caricatured, but Peters has found women have “very complex, complicated, unique experiences” and pursue abortions because they can’t give a child what she or he deserves materially and spiritually. They experience a host of feelings, sometimes contradictory: sadness and happiness, relief and guilt. “Nobody’s confused. There’s no sense of, ‘Did I do the right thing?’” she said. “There are women who feel guilty, who feel like having an abortion may be a sin, but they also believe God forgives sins.” Abou El Fadl doesn’t consider himself pro-abortion. He wouldn’t want his daughter to terminate a pregnancy, but as a jurist, he cannot be bound to a single issue, he said. He must consider the totality of circumstances, and he worries about a Supreme Court hewing to an originalist perspective endorsed by Founding Fathers who accepted slavery and all sorts of discrimination. This is largely the same high court that upheld President Donald Trump’s “Muslim ban,” he noted. “Muslims, who are already targets of Islamophobia and incredible amounts of racism, do we really want to live in a country with less rights?” he asked. “It’s very hard for me to forget about the role of the state and say it’s a simple matter of: Do we kill babies or do we not kill babies?” Whether she’s escorting women to a clinic, teaching at Elon or simply having dinner with friends and family, Peters said, she’s guided by Scripture – verses that command she care for the poor and marginalized, love her neighbors and seek social justice. To those who’d call her abortion views heretical, she’d point out the Bible says nothing explicitly about abortion. She’s also never found a pregnant woman who was not invested in what might happen to her potential child. Suggesting otherwise – or pitting a mother against her fetus for political points – is more than problematic, she said. “Pitting women against their prenate is a fiction we are now building our legal system around, and I think that’s very dangerous,” she said. “The problem is the belief that life begins at conception is a theological belief. … I think it’s a bit of a false argument in the sense that it’s not a theological belief that people are fully autonomous individuals with legal and human rights. The idea a fertilized egg should be afforded the exact same rights – it’s fine to have that belief if you don’t impose it on others.”


Article: 41
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Louisiana woman who alleges she was denied abortion after fetus’ fatal diagnosis says ‘it should not happen to any other woman’
Author: Ray Sanchez and Melissa Alonso
Publication_Date:  Published 1:48 PM EDT, Fri August 26, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  A pregnant Louisiana woman who alleges she was denied an abortion despite the fetus being diagnosed with a fatal condition says other women should not have to experience her plight. Nancy Davis said she is planning to get an abortion in another state after a Louisiana hospital allegedly chose not to perform the procedure even though her baby was diagnosed with acrania, a rare congenital disorder in which a fetus’ skull does not form inside of the womb. Acrania is a lethal condition with death within the first week of life, according to the Fetal Medicine Foundation. Davis’ case reflects the confusion and wrenching decisions faced by mothers and health care professionals after the June 24 US Supreme Court ruling to overturn the constitutional right to an abortion. Laws that ban abortion or severely restrict the procedure have subsequently gone into effect in about a dozen states – Louisiana among them. “I want you to imagine what it’s been like to continue this pregnancy for another six weeks after this diagnosis,” Davis said at a news conference on the steps of the Louisiana State Capitol in Baton Rouge. “This is not fair to me and it should not happen to any other woman.” Davis, who said she learned of the baby’s fatal condition 10 weeks into her pregnancy, was joined at the news conference by the baby’s father and her attorneys, including Ben Crump. “The doctors told me that my baby would die shortly after birth,” Davis said. “They told me that I should terminate the pregnancy. Because of the state of Louisiana’s abortion ban they cannot perform the procedure. Basically, they said I had to carry my baby to bury my baby. They seemed confused about the law and afraid of what would happen to them if they perform a criminal abortion, according to the law.” In a statement last week, a spokesperson for Woman’s Hospital in Baton Rouge, Caroline Isemann, said the hospital cannot comment on a specific patient but said navigating an unviable pregnancy is extremely complex. “We look at each patient’s individual circumstances and how to remain in compliance with all current state laws to the best of our ability,” Isemann told CNN. “Even if a specific diagnosis falls under medically futile exceptions provided by (the Louisiana Department of Health), the laws addressing treatment methods are much more complex and seemingly contradictory.” Crump called on the state to hold a special session of the Louisiana legislature to address the “public health catastrophe” created by “vague and confusing” abortion laws. The attorney said Louisiana lawmakers have “inflicted unspeakable pain, emotional damage and physical risk” by stepping between his client and her doctors. He said other women and healthcare providers will endure a similar plight because state law has “created an environment of confusion and fear.” Isemann told The New York Times that Louisiana’s multiple abortion bans, which use different terminology, complicate matters. “There is currently no guidance on which law controls” the situation, she said, adding that the hospital was struggling to ensure that a doctor who terminates a pregnancy after a diagnosis of acrania was safe from prosecution. The lawmaker who wrote the state’s abortion law, state Sen. Katrina Jackson, told CNN affiliate WAFB that Davis should have been allowed an abortion based on a list of 25 exclusive exceptions from the Louisiana Department of Health. “This woman is seeking a medical procedure for a pregnancy that is not viable outside of the womb,” Jackson told WAFB. It’s unclear which state Davis will go to for the abortion. “Davis and her family are very grateful to all of those who donated to her to be able to arrange for travel,” Crump said. “By the time Ms. Davis has the procedure she needs next week, she would have carried this unsustainable pregnancy for an additional month and a half,” with “risks and emotional tolls.” The father of the baby, Chedrick Cole, said, “From afar it’s very easy to have an opinion about something but until you’re actually in this situation and going through it, you don’t understand how complex it is. I also want to say that we must continue to raise consciousness and awareness about situations like this because it’s happening all over. … And it’s so much bigger than us and our family.”



Article: 42
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Abortion pills are becoming more commonly used but won’t be a post-Roe ‘panacea’
Author: Deidre McPhillips
Publication_Date:  Updated 3:24 PM EDT, Tue July 19, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  In light of last month’s Supreme Court decision that overturned Roe v. Wade and revoked the constitutional right to abortion, much of the Biden administration’s response has been focused on protecting access to medication abortion. Mifepristone – a pill used to medically induce abortion in combination with another drug, misoprostol – is approved for use by the US Food and Drug Administration, and some have argued that its federal approval could take precedence over state laws attempting to ban it. Medication abortion has steadily grown in acceptance since it became an option about 20 years ago and is now used in more than half of abortions, outpacing the aspiration, or surgical, procedure for the first time in 2020, according to data from the Guttmacher Institute, a research group that supports abortion rights. But medication abortion is not always an appropriate option – sometimes for medical reasons but more often in the context of the individual situation – and experts say it’s critical to protect access to abortion as broadly as possible. “Medication abortion is the primary focus of all my research, but I’m the first one to say that it’s not a panacea and cannot be the answer for everyone,” said Ushma Upadhyay, an associate professor at the University of California, San Francisco’s Bixby Center for Global Reproductive Health. GenBioPro, the manufacturer of generic mifepristone, lists a few reasons for people to avoid using the abortion pill on their website. They include allergies to the drug, long-term use of steroids for things like autoimmune disorders, and history of a bleeding disorder. It’s also not a viable option for the few people who do get pregnant while an IUD is in place. Overall, experts say that these clinical exceptions are uncommon. “It is very rare that medication abortion would be absolutely contraindicated for someone,” said Dr. Jen Villavicencio, lead for equity transformation at the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Dr. Alice Mark, an abortion provider in Massachusetts and interim medical adviser to the National Abortion Federation, estimates that she has a patient with these considerations only one or two times each year. More restrictive, perhaps, are timing limitations for the drug. The FDA has specifically approved mifepristone for use in the first 10 weeks of pregnancy, and the vast majority of abortions happen within this timeframe. Nearly 80% of abortions in the United States in 2019 were performed at nine weeks or earlier, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. But there are two main reasons why a person may seek an abortion after the first 10 weeks of pregnancy, Upadhyay said: There is new information learned or barriers to care that prevent earlier action. “Many people do have delayed recognition of pregnancy, particularly younger people, adolescents, people who’ve never been pregnant before,” she said. Otherwise, there might be new knowledge about their health or the health of the fetus, changes to their economic situation or partner relationship, or other new information. Even when patients have their minds made up, barriers to access can add delays to the timeline. “We’ve had participants in our research tell us that by the time they’ve collected the funding needed to make the trip and to pay for the abortion, they will call the clinic and learn that the price has gone up [with the increased gestational age]. And then they have to spend more time gathering the funds,” Upadhyay said. These barriers are generally the same that exist across health care more broadly for more disadvantaged populations. Although it might be easier to find an abortion provider than a general physician – at least before the Supreme Court ruling changed the provider landscape – most don’t have the economic resources to fund a “time-sensitive health emergency,” said Kirsten Moore, director of the Expanding Medication Abortion Access Project. “There’s a real burden on the patient to put all this together,” she said. “I don’t think it’s finding the abortion provider, per se, that’s the challenge. It’s coming up with the resources to actually bring it all together.” Clinical considerations aside, experts say that individual preferences and the nuances of each situation mean medication abortion is not right for everyone. “Most people who get to my clinic kind of know what the choices are when they get there. And I think a lot of people who are trying to decide about abortion do their own research,” Mark said. There’s a medical screening for every patient, just like with any other procedure, but “the main consideration is really just like, ‘What do you feel like is going to fit best for you in your life?’ ” she said. Generally, medication abortion allows the person to manage the process at home or at their own pace. This option can provide more privacy but typically comes with more pain, cramping and bleeding for a longer time. The aspiration procedure, on the other hand, is a quicker process that includes pain management and confirmation from a medical professional that it is complete. It can be a better option for people for whom pregnancy is already a traumatic experience, experts say. If you are a low-income mom of two already and you are pregnant and don’t want to be, you might like the idea of a noninvasive option that you can manage at home. But you might also be dealing with more than anybody does on a regular basis, so you might just want to get into a clinic and get things over with,” Moore said. In any case, both medication abortion and the aspiration procedure have been proved to be safe and effective. “Individual patients may have their own needs and preferences, and it’s important that my patients be able to choose the method that is right for them, ” Villavicencio said. “In the future of abortion care in a post-Roe landscape, there will be new benefits to each intervention – medication abortion, for example, because of its proven safety via mail order and the (surgical) abortion procedure because patients who have to travel to a different state will know with certainty that they are no longer pregnant immediately upon completion of the procedure.”


Article: 43
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Doctors worry that online misinformation will push abortion-seekers toward ineffective, dangerous methods
Author: Naomi Thomas
Publication_Date: Published 2:57 PM EDT, Wed July 13, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  After a US Supreme Court draft decision on Roe v. Wade was leaked in May, Dr. Joshua Trebach noticed a disturbing turn in the online conversation around abortion. “I started seeing things on social media, things like TikTok, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, people saying ‘oh, if Roe v. Wade does get overturned, here are some secret, sneaky ways that you can drink some tea and have an abortion,’ ” Trebach said. Now that Roe v. Wade has been overturned and some states are putting strict limits on abortions, there’s widespread confusion about whether the procedures are available and to whom. Physicians and poison control officials say they’re worried that people seeking abortions will turn to ineffective and dangerous methods shared online, potentially delaying or preventing safe, proven abortion care. Social media companies told CNN they’re taking a range of actions, including reviewing some abortion-related posts, elevating content from verified sources, and labeling or removing certain posts. This type of abortion misinformation is “scary,” said Trebach, an emergency medicine physician and a medical toxicologist in New York City. Some herbs people described may not do anything at all. Others could have a range of medical effects or even be deadly. Trebach said the online posts he saw came from unverified sources and described substances he learned about only in toxicology training. In the US, many herbs and supplements are regulated as food, not drugs, meaning there isn’t safety or efficacy data to back their use. Negative effects from an herb can’t always be treated easily, he said. “At the end of the day, nothing – no plant, no herb, no tea, no tincture – is going to be safer or more effective than the current medical standard of abortion, the current medical therapies that we have,” he said. “Nothing is a fair substitute for that.” Julie Weber, board chair of the American Association of Poison Control Centers, said centers have not seen an increase in exposure calls about people attempting abortions, but they’re preparing for it. People can call the association at 1-800-222-1222 or reach experts at poisonhelp.org if they have questions about a substance and its potential effects. “When I hear or start seeing questions on social media, I hear of people talking about alternative medications or herbal products or supplements, I do get concerned,” Weber said. “And I am concerned with this, and we do want to get that message out there that this is not necessarily a safe alternative or one that’s even going to be effective.” Tech companies respond Andrea Miller, president of the advocacy group National Institute for Reproductive Health, has seen abortion misinformation online and said some of it might be coming from “well-intentioned people who are outraged and fearful and want to help right now, but they may inadvertently be sharing information that isn’t accurate or directing people to nefarious resources without realizing it.” Miller also worries that some posts may be designed to misinform and confuse. “There has been a calculated, pernicious misinformation campaign that has been many decades in the making from those who are opposed to reproductive freedom, and we anticipate that that is going to be ratcheted up significantly now,” she said. One TikTok video – with hashtags such as #womenshealth and #womensrights – listed a range of fruits, herbs and other “DIY” methods that it claimed could induce abortions. It got more than 244,000 likes before CNN flagged it and it was removed by the platform last week. TikTok says it’s removing videos about abortion that violate its policy against medical misinformation, although it allows other content on the topics, such as videos discussing access to the procedure, according to a spokesperson. The short-form video platform is also redirecting searches for certain hashtags such as #herbalabortion and #naturalabortion to its Community Guidelines rather than showing results. Similar posts with misleading, potentially dangerous claims about inducing an abortion have also been shared on Twitter and Facebook, although most appeared to have less reach and engagement than on TikTok. A Facebook spokesperson said that posts about abortion may be reviewed by its third-party fact-checking partners, and content that is rated “false,” “altered” or “partly false” by fact checkers will have its distribution reduced. Facebook pages, groups or accounts that repeatedly share content debunked by fact checkers may also have their reach reduced or lose the ability to advertise or monetize, according to the company. Two posts listing potentially harmful claims about self-induced abortion that CNN flagged to Facebook had not been labeled by fact checkers, which choose which content to review, as of Wednesday. Twitter says it is working to “pre-bunk” misinformation by elevating reliable sources, including on its Trends and Twitter Moments features, according to a spokesperson. Twitter’s rules generally do not prohibit discussion of abortion, contraception or related topics; under the platform’s misinformation policy, it takes action against misleading information related to Covid-19, civic integrity, synthetic and manipulated media, and crisis situations, but the policy does not mention abortion. As of Wednesday, the platform had not labeled or removed several posts flagged by CNN that contained advice on using herbs or large doses of medication that toxicologists said could be ineffective or harmful. Miller advises people seeking abortions or information about the procedure to approach the issue in the same way they would any other health concern: “That is to make sure that they are seeking it out from reputable sources, or if they think ‘hey, that’s an intriguing post, that’s an intriguing thing, I might want to check that out,’ make sure to do some additional research if you’re not confident of the source, even if it’s one of your closest friends and you’re not sure where they got it and they’re not sure where it came from.” Distraction from truthful information Doctors CNN spoke with said they’re worried that videos containing abortion misinformation imply there are no paths to legal abortion – which could distract from safe, available options and create more confusion.“I feel like nowadays, we are lucky that we do have very safe medication abortion options for people, and I’m worried that if people are circulating misinformation, then people will not know that there are ways that they can access safe methods,” said Dr. Jody Steinauer, director of the UCSF Bixby Center for Global Reproductive Health. Although there are medications that are approved by the US Food and Drug Administration to allow abortion to take place at home, some people may assume they can’t access them, Dr. Nisha Verma, a fellow with the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and an ob/gyn with a specialty in complex family planning. “Some people may also turn to unsafe abortion methods when they feel they have no other option or based on information they are gathering on social media,” Verma said. Posts and content on topics that inspire emotion are much more likely to go viral on social media. And that can be dangerous when they contain false or misleading claims. “Misinformation can be harmful because it may lead people to try to end their pregnancies in an unsafe way, potentially exposing them to serious bodily harm. While people can self-manage their abortions in a safe way, spreading misinformation about unsafe methods of abortion is incredibly dangerous,” Verma said. However, without a federal constitutional right to an abortion, access to abortion differs from state to state. The Biden administration is working across multiple federal agencies to respond to the Roe v. Wade reversal. On Tuesday, the Justice Department announced a task force aimed at identifying ways to protect reproductive rights in the wake of the Supreme Court decision that struck down the federal right to abortion. And last week, President Joe Biden signed an executive order aimed at protecting access to reproductive health services. The order attempts to safeguard access to medication abortion and emergency contraception, protect patient privacy and launch public education efforts. It also aims to bolster the security of and the legal options available to those seeking and providing abortion services. Losing valuable time Even before the Supreme Court decision, there was evidence that some people tried to self-manage abortions with things like herbs, physical trauma and uterine trauma, said Jenny Higgins, a professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. “We, of course, know those techniques are ineffective and, in some cases, also harmful,” Higgins said. When it comes to methods circulating on social media, she said, her bigger concern is that they will use up valuable time. “Someone might look into alternatives such as herbs, spend time trying to gather information, procure that substance, take the herb, take it again, take it again, and by then, they are later in gestation and maybe even less likely to be able to access effective methods,” Higgins said. “There’s a real-time constraint here,” she said. “The later people are in gestation, the more effort that needs to be involved in the abortion.” Being on the border of 10 to 12 weeks of pregnancy can make a big difference in whether someone can safely use FDA-approved abortion drugs, she said. The available methods for self-managed abortion today are very different from in the pre-Roe era. “I want people to understand that now we have the very same pills, the very same FDA-approved pills that are used in standard abortion care can be ordered online,” she said. “There are self-managed techniques that are extremely safe and effective.”


Article: 44
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: These women ran an underground abortion network in the 1960s. Here’s what they fear might happen today
Author: Sandee LaMotte
Publication_Date: Updated 11:08 AM EDT, Sun April 23, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  — The voice on the phone in 1966 was gruff and abrupt: “Do you want the Chevy, the Cadillac or the Rolls Royce?” A Chevy abortion would cost about $200, cash in hand, the voice explained. A Cadillac was around $500, and the Rolls Royce was $1,000. “You can’t afford more than the Chevy? Fine,” the voice growled. “Go to this address at this time. Don’t be late and don’t forget the cash.” The voice disappeared. Dorie Barron told CNN she recalls staring blankly at the phone in her hand, startled by the sudden empty tone. Then it hit her: She had just arranged an illegal abortion with the Chicago Mafia. ‘All of a sudden they were gone’ The motel Barron was sent to was in an unfamiliar part of Chicago, a scary “middle of nowhere,” she said. She was told to go to a specific room, sit on the bed and wait. Suddenly three men and a woman came in the door. “I was petrified. They spoke all of three sentences to me the entire time: ‘Where’s the money?’ ‘Lie back and do as I tell you.’ And finally ‘Get in the bathroom,’” when the abortion was over, Barron said. “Then all of a sudden they were gone.” Bleeding profusely, Barron managed to find a cab to take her home. When the bleeding didn’t stop, her bed-ridden mother made her go to the hospital. At 24, Barron was taking care of her ailing mother and her 2-year-old daughter when she discovered she was pregnant. Her boyfriend, who had no job and lived with his parents, “freaked,” said Barron, who appears in a recent HBO documentary. The boyfriend suggested she get an abortion. She had never considered that option. “But what was I to do? My mom was taking care of my daughter from her bed while I worked — they would read and play games until I got home,” Barron said.”How was either of us going to cope with a baby? “Looking back, I realize I was taking my life in my hands,” said Barron, now an 81-year-old grandmother. “To this day it gives me chills. If I had died, what in God’s green earth would have happened to my mom and daughter?” Few rights for women Women in the 1960s endured restrictions relatively unknown to women today. The so-called “fairer sex” could not serve on juries and often could not get an Ivy League education. Women earned about half as much as a man doing the same job and were seldom promoted. Women could not get a credit card unless they were married — and then only if their husband co-signed. The same applied to birth control — only the married need apply. More experienced women shared a workaround with the uninitiated: “Go to Woolworth, buy a cheap wedding-type ring and wear it to your doctor’s appointment. And don’t forget to smile.” Marital rape wasn’t legally considered rape. And, of course, women had no legal right to terminate a pregnancy until four states — Alaska, Hawaii, New York and Washington — legalized abortion in 1970, three years before Roe v. Wade became the law of the land. Illinois had no such protection, said Heather Booth, a lifelong feminist activist and political strategist: “Three people discussing having an abortion in Chicago in 1965 was a conspiracy to commit felony murder.”Despite that danger, a courageous band of young women — most in their 20’s, some in college, some married with children — banded together in Chicago to create an underground abortion network. The group was officially created in 1969 as the “Abortion Counseling Service of Women’s Liberation.” But after running ads in an underground newspaper: “Pregnant? Don’t want to be? Call Jane,” each member of the group answered the phone as “Jane.” “We were co-conspirators with the women who called us,” said 75-year-old Laura Kaplan, who published a book about the service in 1997 entitled “The Story of Jane: The Legendary Underground Feminist Abortion Service.” “We’ll protect you; we hope you’ll protect us,” Kaplan said. “We’ll take care of you; we hope you’ll take care of us.” What started as referrals to legitimate abortion providers changed to personalized service when some members of Jane learned to safely do the abortions themselves. Between the late 1960s and 1973, the year that the Supreme Court decided Roe v. Wade, Jane had arranged or performed over 11,000 abortions. “Our culture is always searching for heroes,” said Kaplan. “But you don’t have to be a hero to do extraordinary things. Jane was just ordinary people working together — and look what we could accomplish, which is amazing, right?” Even after several members were caught and arrested, the group continued to provide abortions for women too poor to travel to states where abortion had been legalized. “I prayed a lot. I didn’t want to go to jail,” said 80-year-old Marie Learner, who allowed the Janes to perform abortions at her apartment. “Some of us had little children. Some were the sole breadwinners in their home,” Learner said. “It was fearlessness in the face of overwhelming odds.” Having an abortion like it’s 1965 The story of Jane has been immortalized in Kaplan’s book, numerous print articles, a 2022 movie, “Call Jane,” starring Elizabeth Banks and Sigourney Weaver, and a documentary on HBO (which, like CNN, is owned by Warner Bros. Discovery). Today the historical tale of Jane has taken on a new significance. After the 2022 Supreme Court reversal of Roe v. Wade and the mid-term takeover of the US House of Representatives by Republicans, emboldened conservative lawmakers and judges have acted on their anti-abortion beliefs. Currently more than a dozen states have banned or imposed severe restrictions on abortion. Georgia has banned abortions after six weeks, even though women are typically unaware they are pregnant at that stage. In mid-April, Florida Governor Ron DeSantis signed a bill that would ban most abortions after six weeks. It won’t go into effect until the state Supreme Court overturns its previous precedent on abortion. Several other states are considering similar legislation. In other states, judicial battles are underway to protect abortion access. “It’s a horrific situation right now. People will be harmed, some may even die,” said Booth, who helped birth the Jane movement while in college. “Women without family support, without the information they need, may be isolated and either harm themselves looking to end an unwanted pregnancy or will be harmed because they went to an unscrupulous and illegal provider,” said Booth, now 77. Today there is medication abortion A key difference between the 60s and today is medication abortion, which 54% of people in the United States used to end a pregnancy in 2022. Available via prescription and through the mail, use of the drugs is two-fold: A person takes a first pill, mifepristone, to block the hormone needed for a pregnancy to continue.  A day or two later, the patient takes a second drug, misoprostol, which causes the uterus to contract, creating the cramping and bleeding of labor. In early April a Texas judge, US District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk – a  Trump appointee who has been vocal about his anti-abortion stance — suspended the US Food and Drug Administration’s approval of mifepristone despite 23 years of data showing the drug is safe to use, safer even than penicillin or Viagra. On Friday, the Supreme Court froze the ruling and a subsequent decision by the Fifth US Circuit Court of Appeals at the request of the Justice Department and the drug manufacturer. The action allows access to mifepristone in states where it’s legal until appeals play out over the months to come. However, 15 states currently restrict access to medication abortion, even by mail. The actions of anti-abortion activists, who have been accused of “judge shopping” to get the decisions they want, is “an unprecedented attack on democracy meant to undermine the will of the vast majority of Americans who want this pill — mifepristone — to remain legal and available,” Heather Booth told CNN. “This is a further weaponization of the courts to brazenly advance the end goal of banning abortion entirely,” she added. If women in her day could have had access to medications that could be used safely in their homes, they would not have been forced to risk their lives, said Dorie Barron, thinking back to her own terrifying abortion in a sketchy Chicago motel. “I’m depressed as hell, watching stupid, indifferent men control and destroy women’s lives all over again,” she said. “I really fear getting an abortion could soon be like 1965.” Knowledge is power Chicago college student Heather Booth had just finished a summer working with civil rights activists in Mississippi when she was asked to help with a different kind of injustice. A girl in another dorm was considering suicide because she was pregnant. Booth, who excelled at both organization and chutzpah, found a local doctor and negotiated an abortion for the girl. Word spread quickly. “There were about 100 women a week calling for help, much more than one person could handle,” Booth said. “I recruited about 12 other people and began training them how to do the counseling.” Counseling was a key part of the new service. This was a time when people “barely spoke about sex, how women’s bodies functioned or even how people got pregnant,” Booth said. To help each woman understand what was going to happen to them, Booth quizzed the abortion provider about every aspect of the procedure. “What do you do in advance? Will it be painful? How painful? Can you walk afterwards? Do you need someone to be with you to take you home?” The questions continued: “What amount of bleeding is expected, and can a woman handle it on their own? If there’s a problem is there an urgent number they can call?” Armed with details few if any physicians provided, the counselors at Jane could fully inform each caller about the abortion experience. The group even published a flyer describing the procedure, long before the groundbreaking 1970 book “Our Bodies, Ourselves” began to educate women about their sexuality and health. “I don’t particularly like doctors because I always feel dissatisfied with the experience,” said Marie Learner, who spoke to many of the women who underwent an abortion at her home. “But after their abortion at Jane, women told me, ‘Wow, that was the best experience I’ve ever had with people helping me with a medical issue.’” Eileen Smith, now 73, was one of those women. “Jane made you feel like you were part of this bigger picture, like we were all in this together,” she said. “They helped me do this illegal thing and then they’re calling to make sure I’m OK? Wow! “For me, it helped battle the feeling that I was a bad person, that ‘What’s wrong with me? Why did I get pregnant? I should know better’ voice in my head,” said Smith. “It was priceless.” Respecting each woman’s choice Many of the women who joined Jane had never experienced an abortion. Some viewed the work as political, a part of the burgeoning feminist movement. Others considered the service as simply humanitarian health care. All saw the work as an opportunity to respect each woman’s choice. “I was a stay-at-home mom with four kids,” said Martha Scott, who is now in her 80s. “We knew the woman needed to feel as though she was in control of what was happening to her. We were making it happen for her, but it was not about us. It was about her.” Some volunteers, like Dorie Barron, experienced the Jane difference firsthand when she found herself pregnant a few years after her abortion at the hands of the Mafia. “It was a 100% total reversal — I had never experienced such kindness,” Barron said. Not only did a Jane hold each woman’s hand and explain every step of the process, “they gave each of us a giant supply of maternity sanitary pads, and a nice big handful of antibiotics,” she said. “And for the next week, I got a phone call every other day to see how I was.” Barron soon began volunteering for Jane by providing pregnancy testing for women in the back of a church in Chicago’s Hyde Park. “It wasn’t just abortion,” Barron explained. “We also said, ‘You could consider adoption,’ and gave adoption referrals. And if the woman wanted to continue with her pregnancy, we said, ‘Fine, please by all that is holy make sure you get prenatal care, take your vitamins, and eat as best you can.’ It was women helping women with whatever they needed.” Most of the women who contacted Jane were unable to support themselves, in unhealthy relationships, or already had children at home, so the service was a way of “helping them get back on track,” said Smith, who, like Barron, had begun working for Jane after her abortion. “We were telling them ‘This isn’t the end of the world. You can continue to leave your boyfriend or your husband or continue to just take care of those kids you have.’ We were there to help them get through this,” said Smith, who later became a homecare nurse. Diane Stevens says she came to work for Jane after experiencing an abortion in 1968 at the age of 19. She was living in California at the time, which provided “therapeutic abortions” if approved in advance by physicians. “I’d had a birth control failure, and I was coached by Planned Parenthood on how to do this,” said Stevens, now 74. “I had to see two psychiatrists and one doctor and tell them I was not able to go through with the pregnancy because it would a danger to both my physical and mental health. “I was admitted to the psychiatric ward, although I didn’t really know that — I thought I was just in a hospital bed. But oh no, ‘I was mentally ill,’ so that’s where they put me,” said Stevens, who later went to nursing school with Smith. “Then they wheeled me off for the abortion. I had general anesthesia, was there for two days, and then I was discharged. Isn’t that crazy?” Sakinah Ahad Shannon, now 75, was one of the few Black women who volunteered as a counselor at Jane. She joined after accompanying a friend who was charged a mere $50 for her abortion. At that time, Jane’s fee was between $1 and $100, based on what the woman could afford to pay, Shannon said. “When I walked in, I said, ‘Oh my God, here we go again. It’s a room of White women, archangels who are going to save the world,’” said Shannon, a social worker and member of the Congress of Racial Equality, an interracial group of non-violent activists who pioneered “Freedom Rides” and helped organize the March on Washington in 1963. What she heard and saw at her friend’s counseling session was so impressive it “changed my life,” Shannon said. She and her family later opened and operated three Chicago abortion clinics for over 25 years, all using the Jane philosophy of communication and respect. “It was a profoundly amazing experience for me,” she said. “I call the Janes my sisters. The color line didn’t matter. We were all taking the same risk.” We can take care of ourselves It wasn’t long before the women discovered a “doctor” performing abortions for Jane had been lying about his credentials. There was no medical degree — in the HBO documentary, he admitted he had honed his skills by assisting an abortion provider. The group imploded. A number of members quit in horror and dismay. For the women who stayed, it was an epiphany, said Martha Scott. Like her, several of the Janes had been assisting this fake doctor for years, learning the procedures step by step. “You’d learn how to insert a speculum, then how to swap out the vagina with an antiseptic, then how to give numbing shots around the cervix and then how to dilate the cervix. You learned and mastered each step before you moved on to the next,” said Laura Kaplan, who chronicled the procedure in her book. By now, several of the Janes were quite experienced and willing to do the work. Why not perform the abortions themselves? “Clearly, this was an intense responsibility,” said Judith Acana, a 27-year-old high school teacher who joined Jane in 1970. She started her training by helping “long terms,” women who were four or five months along in the pregnancy. “Remember, abortion was illegal (in Illinois) so it could take weeks for a woman to find help,” said Arcana, now 80. “Frequently women who wanted an abortion at 8 or 10 weeks wound up being 16 or 18 weeks or more by the time they found Jane.” The miscarriage could happen quickly, but it rarely did, she said. It usually took anywhere from one to two days. “Women who had no one to help them would come back when contractions started,” Arcana said. “One of my strongest memories is of a teenage girl who had an appointment to have her miscarriage on my living room floor.” The group also paid two Janes to live in an apartment and be on call 24/7 to assist women who had no one to help them miscarry at home, said Arcana, a lifelong educator, author and poet. “But many women took care of it on their own, in very amazing and impressive and powerful ways,” she said. Any woman who had concerns or questions while miscarrying alone could always call Jane for advice any time of the day or night. “People would call in a panic: ‘The bleeding won’t stop,’” Smith recalled. “I would tell them, ‘Get some ice, put it on your stomach, elevate your legs, relax.’ And they would say ‘Oh my gosh, thank you!’ because they were so scared.” For women who were in their first trimester, Jane offered traditional D&C abortions — the same dilation and curettage used by hospitals then and today, said Scott, who performed many of the abortions for Jane. Later the group used vacuum aspiration, which was over in a mere five to 10 minutes. “Vacuum aspiration was much easier to do, and I think it’s less difficult for the woman,” Scott said. “Abortion is exactly like any other medical procedure. It’s the decision that’s an issue — the doing is very straightforward. This was something a competent, trained person could do.” Busted, but not broken It was May 3, 1972. Judith Arcana was the driver that day, responsible for relocating women waiting at what was called “the front” to a separate apartment or house where the abortions were done, known as “the place.” On this day, a Wednesday, the “place” was a South Shore high-rise apartment. Arcana was escorting a woman who had completed her abortion when they were stopped by police at the elevator. “They asked us, ‘Which apartment did you come out of?’ And the poor woman burst into tears and blurted out the apartment number,” Arcana said. “They took me downstairs, put cuffs on me and hooked me to a steel hook inside of the police van.” Inside the apartment on the 11th floor, Martha Scott said she was setting up the bedroom for the next abortion when she heard a knock at the door, followed by screaming: “You can’t come in!” “I shut the bedroom door and locked it,” Scott said, then hid the instruments and sat on the bed to wait. It wasn’t long until a cop kicked the door in and made her join the other women in the living room. “We tell this joke about how the cops came in, saw all these women and said, ‘Where’s the abortionist?’ You know, assuming that it would be a man,” Scott said. By day’s end, seven members of Jane were behind bars: Martha Scott, Diane Stevens, Judy Arcana, Jeanne Galatzer-Levy, Abby Pariser, Sheila Smith and Madeleine Schwenk. Suddenly what had been an underground effort for years was front page headlines. “Had we not gotten arrested, I think no one would ever have known about Jane other than the women we served,” Scott said. An emergency meeting of Jane was called. The turnout was massive — even women who had not been active in months showed up, anxious to know the extent of the police probe, according to the women with whom CNN spoke. Despite widespread fear and worry, the group immediately began making alternate plans for women scheduled for abortions at Jane in the next few days to weeks. The group even paid for transportation to other cities where abortion had already been legalized, they said. News reports over the next few days gave further details of the bust: There was no widespread investigation by the police. It was a single incident, triggered by a call from a sister-in-law who was upset with her relative’s decision to have an abortion, they said. “It wasn’t long after I was arrested that I came back and worked for quite a few months,” said Scott, one of the few fully trained to do abortions. “I like to think I was a good soldier,” Scott said. “I like to think what did made a difference not only to a whole bunch of people, but also to ourselves. It gave us a sense of empowerment that comes when you do something that is hard to do and also right.” As paranoia eased, women began to come back to work at Jane, determined to carry on. “After the bust, we had a meeting and were told ‘Everybody needs to start assisting and learn how to do abortions.’ I was like, ‘Whoa, whoa, whoa!’” said Eileen Smith, who had not been arrested. “But you felt like you really didn’t have much of a choice. We had to keep the service running.” Rescued by ‘Jane Roe’ The preliminary hearing for the arrested seven was in August. Several of the women in the apartment waiting for abortions the day of the arrest suddenly developed amnesia and refused to testify. According to Kaplan’s book, one of the women later said, “The cops tried to push me around, but f**k them. I wasn’t going to tell on you.” It didn’t matter. Each Jane was charged with 11 counts of abortion and conspiracy to commit abortion, with a possible sentence of up to 110 years in prison. As they waited for trial, the lawyer for the seven, Jo-Anne Wolfson, adopted delaying tactics, Kaplan said. A case representing a Texas woman, cited as “Jane Roe” to protect her privacy, was being considered by the US Supreme Court. If the Court ruled in Roe’s favor, the case against the Jane’s might be thrown out. That’s exactly what happened. On March 9, 1973, three months after the Supreme Court had legalized abortion in the US, the case against the seven women was dropped and their arrest records were expunged. Later that spring, a majority of Janes, burned out by the intensity of the work over the last few years, voted to close shop. An end of Jane party was held on May 20. According to Kaplan’s book, the invitation read: “You are cordially invited to attend The First, Last and Only Curette Caper; the Grand Finale of the Abortion Counseling Service. RSVP: Call Jane.” Epilogue Today, most of the surviving members of Jane are in their 70s and 80s, shocked but somehow not surprised by the actions of abortion opponents. “This is a country of ill-educated politicos who know nothing about women’s bodies, nor do they care,” said Dorie Barron. “It will take generations to even begin to undo the devastating harm to women’s rights.” In the meantime, women should research all available options, keep that information confidential, seek support from groups working for abortion rights, and “share your education with as many women as you can,” Barron added. As more and more reproductive freedoms have been rolled back over the past year, many of the Janes are angry and fearful for the future. “This is about the most intimate decision of our lives — when, whether and with whom we have a child. Everyone should have the ability to make decisions about our own lives, bodies, and futures without political interference,” said Heather Booth, who has spent her life after leaving Jane fighting for civil and women’s rights. “We need to organize, raise our voices and our votes, and overturn this attack on our freedom and our lives. I have seen that when we take action and organize we can change the world.”



Article: 45
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Texas judge halts state abortion bans in cases of ‘emergent medical conditions’ threatening pregnant patients
Author: Andy Rose
Publication_Date: Updated 12:46 AM EDT, Sat August 5, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  A Texas judge issued an order late Friday temporarily barring the state from enforcing its ban on abortion after about six weeks of pregnancy in cases where a patient’s life or health could be endangered by an “emergent medical condition.” District Judge Jessica Mangrum ruled the law is ambiguous enough to make it difficult for women to obtain abortions, even when facing serious medical complications. The law “has created an imminent risk that Physician Plaintiffs and other physicians throughout Texas will have no choice but to bar or delay the provision of abortion care to pregnant persons in Texas for whom an abortion would prevent or alleviate a risk of death or risk to their health (including their fertility) for fear of liability under Texas’s abortion bans,” the ruling reads. The order comes after the judge heard several days of testimony last month from women who say Texas law forced them to continue with high-risk pregnancies. One plaintiff, Samantha Casiano, said she was forced to give birth to her daughter despite a diagnosis of anencephaly, a rare birth defect where parts of a baby’s skull and brain are missing. Casiano’s child died four hours after birth. “All she could do was fight to try to get air,” Casiano testified in court. “I had to watch my daughter go from being pink to red to purple.” Lawyers for the state argued in court there was already an adequate exception in the statute for life-threatening pregnancies and blamed doctors for misinterpreting the law. First Assistant Attorney General Brent Webster said in a statement the state filed an appeal that “stays an activist Austin judge’s attempt to override Texas abortion laws pending a ruling by the Texas Supreme Court.” Texas has one of the strictest abortion laws in the country, and access was curtailed even further following the US Supreme Court’s landmark decision to overturn the federal right to abortion last summer. After the high court’s ruling, a trigger law in Texas banned all abortions other than those intended to protect the life of the mother. Before the ruling, Texas banned abortions in 2021 beyond six weeks of pregnancy. The lawsuit was filed by Center for Reproductive Rights on behalf of two doctors and 13 women who suffered complications in pregnancy. “Today’s ruling should prevent other Texans from suffering the unthinkable trauma our plaintiffs endured,” said Nancy Northup, President and CEO of the Center for Reproductive Rights.


Article: 46
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: A 45-year-old got pregnant in a state with a ban on abortions. She flew across the country to get one
Author: Christina Zdanowicz
Publication_Date: Published 4:05 AM EDT, Sun July 9, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  When 45-year-old Victoria realized she was five weeks late and the lines showed as positive on two pregnancy tests, the New Orleans resident dreamed up a plan to get an abortion. Traveling out of state was the only abortion option for Victoria, who asked CNN to withhold her last name out of fear of backlash against her and her family. Louisiana is one of several states that have essentially banned all abortions. “It was probably one of the hardest things I’ve had to go through, from the moment of discovering that I was pregnant at age 45 to actually having to have to take time off work, travel across the country, do a meeting with a doctor, and then take the pills and then skedaddle back home and then go to work like nothing had happened,” Victoria told CNN of her experience earlier this year. Victoria’s story about the distance she traveled and the hardships she endured to get an abortion reflects a wider American reality, where women seeking the procedure must navigate through a patchwork of states with varying levels of access. The average travel time to an abortion facility more than tripled, from less than 30 minutes to more than an hour and a half, after the US Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in 2022, according to a November study in the Journal of the American Medical Association. And for women in Texas and Louisiana, average travel times to the nearest abortion facility were seven hours longer – almost a full workday in travel time to get an abortion. Victoria says she was grateful she could drop everything and afford to spend $1,000 for the procedure, including same-week airfare with connections both ways and appointment and medication fees. “It was so hard for me wrap my head around the fact that I was able to do this, but I’m one of the lucky ones and that there are so many women who are in much tighter positions,” Victoria said. “And, God, what are they going to do?” Why Oregon? Victoria says plans materialized quickly once she knew which states seemed more accessible. She researched the parameters for abortion in a state, how long she would have to take off work, travel options and how soon she could get an appointment. She found abortionfinder.org to be a helpful and reliable source, she says. “Because the situation is so fluid, it changes from day to day, that was really of paramount importance for me to be able to have a reliable source of information,” she said. Driving to a neighboring state was not an option, as every state adjoining Louisiana has a similarly restrictive law that bans virtually all abortions. Victoria says she considered close states, like Florida, but she ultimately dismissed them because available appointments were farther out. “Once I saw that Oregon was so, so protective of reproductive rights, I said, ‘Why would I think about going anywhere else?’” she said. “The second I got the definitive pregnancy result, I was like, ‘OK, let’s book a flight to Oregon. When can we do this?’” She reached out to a friend from college and asked if she could stay with her, detailing the reason for her visit. She then made an appointment and booked a flight for that week, she says. The provider sent instructions, including that the patient must be in Oregon for the telehealth appointment, according to documents provided to CNN. They contacted her within an hour of making the appointment to make sure she had proof of travel documents because she had made it from Louisiana, where the procedure is illegal. Victoria planned to take a day off to fly across the country and work remotely for two days, which fits her hybrid work situation. She says she was grateful to have a supportive, female boss who showed understanding for why she had to take the unexpected time off. “She was the only person I actually kind of broke down and cried for,” Victoria said. “I think it’s because I had been holding it back all week, and telling her was sort of the last thing that I needed to get in place before I could do everything.” They have different views, but that didn’t matter Victoria says the hardest part of her experience was telling her mother because she didn’t know how her mom would feel about it. Victoria and her siblings were raised Catholic. Her father had a strong faith and her mother was a non-practicing Catholic, her mother says. Victoria’s mom asked not to be named for privacy reasons. Victoria’s mother says she wanted to support her daughter, even if she does not agree with what her daughter did. Victoria coming to her with tickets purchased and a full plan made it easy for her mother to support her, the mother says. “I agreed to drive her to the airport and that that was the only thing I could do because this would be a real game-changing thing in her life,” her mother said. “I wanted to support what she wanted to do because she has supported me on several family crises. I just wanted to do it because I love her. “ Victoria said she appreciated her mom for being supportive in a way she didn’t expect. They talked about some of her mother’s friends who had abortions throughout the years, both say. Victoria’s mother even told her about when she tried to get her tubes tied, but her husband found out and she did not pursue it. “I feel like, if anything, it’s made our relationship stronger,” Victoria said. “We already had a fantastically strong relationship, though. So, it’s another rock in the wall.” Support greets her in Oregon After boarding early on a Wednesday in March, Victoria traveled for eight hours on two flights and landed in Portland, Oregon. Victoria reunited with her friend, and they did the things that old friends do, from staying up late talking about college memories to talking about why Victoria was there. They both described the situation as surreal. “The vast majority of reproductive conversations I have with friends at this point are people who are trying desperately to get pregnant,” said her friend, Emily, who asked that CNN not use her last name to keep Victoria’s privacy. “The sort of irony is that there could still be an unplanned pregnancy and it would still be just as devastating as it would have been when we were in our teens and twenties was kind of a shock to me.” Emily, who has been friends with Victoria for about 25 years, says it took so little effort for her to drive to the airport and let her friend stay with her. “I felt honored that she trusted me,” she said. “I was really proud of Victoria. I was impressed that she had taken this in stride and that she had reached out to someone she knew – I think a lot of people would have been ashamed or hidden it.” After the telehealth appointment the next day, Victoria received an overnight package. Victoria took two medications as part of a medication abortion. She took mifepristone at her friend’s home. The next day she took misoprostol before boarding her flight home – she was careful not to take them in her home state, where it’s illegal. “It was like a heavy period,” she said. “I took some Aleve, had to get some extra jumbo pads, and I bled a lot on the flights home, but it was fine.” Physically, she felt fine – it was more of what was happening psychologically that she noticed, she says. “I had this feeling that I should be having some kind of deep, psychological moment of reckoning or something, but I didn’t really feel that,” Victoria said of the experience. “I’ve never wanted to have a kid. I wasn’t torn about this decision.” Her medical options felt dissonant to the care she received before When Victoria learned she was pregnant, a big part of the shock came from not thinking she could get pregnant at age 45, she says. “You hear so much culturally out there about you’re in your forties, are told you’re too old to get pregnant and carry a child to term,” she said. “I feel like I had sort of a false sense of security.” Victoria joked that she’s “careening toward menopause,” but she says she has not been diagnosed as perimenopausal. Her pregnancy news came several months after she was treated for a uterine fibroid, a benign growth, in July 2022, according to medical records. Victoria also tested positive for a PALB2 gene mutation, which can lead to an increased chance of breast cancer, according to a study in the New England Journal of Medicine. She underwent a preventative double mastectomy and reconstruction earlier in 2022, according to medical records provided to CNN. She says she got an excellent standard of care around her surgeries, but it felt dissonant with her state’s laws around abortion. “It felt so surreal to get this really high standard of care around my secondary sexual characteristics, but then to have that freeze, slam shut when it comes to reproductive health, it just felt abrupt,” she said.


Article: 47
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Trump-backed Michigan secretary of state nominee said abortion is ‘child sacrifice’
Author: Em Steck and Andrew Kaczynski
Publication_Date: Updated 12:23 PM EDT, Mon July 4, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  — Before becoming the Trump-backed Republican nominee for Michigan secretary of state, Kristina Karamo said that abortion is “child sacrifice” and a “satanic practice.” “Abortion is really nothing new. The child sacrifice is a very satanic practice, and that’s precisely what abortion is. And we need to see it as such,” Karamo, a community college professor, said in an October 2020 episode of her podcast “It’s Solid Food,” which CNN’s KFile reviewed. “When people in other cultures, when they engage in child sacrifice, they didn’t just sacrifice the child for the sake of bloodshed,” Karamo said later in the episode. “They sacrificed the child cuz they were hoping to get prosperity and that’s precisely why people have abortion now. ‘Because I’m not ready. I don’t wanna have a baby. I don’t feel like it. I don’t have time. I wanna make more money. I want my freedom.’ So you’re sacrificing that child hoping to get something out of their death, which is your freedom, your happiness, your prosperity.” In another comment, Karamo called abortion the “the greatest crime of our nation’s history.” Karamo and her campaign did not respond to multiple requests for comment by CNN. Karamo, a devout conservative Christian who has served on the board of Michigan’s Right to Life organization and on the board of an anti-abortion pregnancy crisis center affiliate in Detroit, reiterated that belief in another episode from July 2020, in which she said humans have sacrificed other humans, including their own children, for “thousands of years, just packaged differently.” “[People] were sacrificing them to these deities, which were really demons,” she said. Karamo went on to say in a later episode of her podcast reviewed by CNN’s KFile that demonic possession is real and can be transmitted through “intimate relationships.” “If a person has demonic possession — I know it’s gonna sound really crazy to me saying that for some people, thinking like what?!” Karamo said in September 2020. “But having intimate relationships with people who are demonically possessed or oppressed — I strongly believe that a person opens themselves up to possession. Demonic possession is real.” Karamo has repeatedly touted to her followers that left-leaning elites are trying to push their own values, including pro-abortion views, on America. In a video she posted on her website in 2018 that CNN’s KFile accessed and reviewed, Karamo suggested a conspiracy in which left-leaning political operatives who now have business relationships with Netflix – including prominent philanthropist and Democratic donor George Soros, former national security adviser Susan Rice and former President Barack Obama — were taking over the streaming service to push pro-abortion content. “Is abortion funny to you? I would argue that it is nothing funny about abortion whatsoever, but apparently Netflix found it quite all right to air episode of Michelle Wolf’s show or season,” Karamo said, describing the comedian’s short-lived Netflix show that aired in 2018 in which Wolf addressed having an abortion. “Why is Netflix putting out a series like this?” she said. “All these people with these interesting political motives, all teaming up to create content for you to consume.” The political newcomer rose to prominence in Michigan politics after she claimed she had witnessed fraud as a poll challenger during the 2020 election and baselessly claimed widespread voter fraud occurred in the state, signing on to an unsuccessful lawsuit. Karamo’s promotion of election denial and other conspiracy theories earned her Trump’s endorsement last fall. If elected to Michigan’s top election post, she would oversee the 2024 presidential election in which Trump is weighing a run. Karamo’s embrace of conspiracy theories has also led to her association with QAnon, a conspiracy theory that posits that Trump was working to take down a shadow cabal of Democratic politicians and elites running a child sex-trafficking ring and that one day soon cabal members will face arrests, tribunals and mass executions. Last year she spoke at a QAnon conference in Las Vegas featuring prominent Q influencers. She previously called for a “citizenship arrest” of Soros and said he “needs to be in jail” and spread the Clinton Kill List conspiracy, a baseless conspiracy theory that alleges former President Bill Clinton and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton have had dozens of people assassinated. CNN previously reported some of Karamo’s beliefs and rhetoric, including her attacks against premarital sex and the LGBTQ community, such as that it will lead to the “normalization” of pedophilia; her anti-vaxxer comments; and her election denialism. Karamo frequently attacks those she disagrees with as being instruments of Satan or “demonic,” including the Democratic Party and the LGBTQ community.


Article: 48
News_Outlet: CNN
Title: Texas woman almost dies because she couldn’t get an abortion
Author: Elizabeth Cohen and John Bonifield
Publication_Date: Updated 7:17 AM EDT, Tue June 20, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  Another woman has come forward with the harrowing details of how the Supreme Court’s decision four months ago to overturn Roe v. Wade put her life in danger. CNN has told the stories of several women – including one from Houston, one from central Texas and one from Cleveland – and what they had to do to obtain medically necessary abortions. Now, a woman from Austin, Texas, has come forward because she nearly died when she couldn’t get a timely abortion. This is her story. The loss of a ‘miracle’ baby Amanda Eid and Josh Zurawski, both now 35, met in 1991 at Aldersgate Academy preschool in Fort Wayne, Indiana, and dated in high school. “Josh always tells me he’s been in love with me since we were 4 years old,” Amanda said. Three years ago, they married in Austin, Texas, where they both work in high-tech jobs. They tried to have a family but failed. Amanda had fertility treatments for a year and a half and finally became pregnant. “Very excited to share that Baby Zurawski is expected in late January,” Amanda shared on Instagram in July. The post included a picture of her and her husband in “Mama” and “Dad” hats, Amanda holding a strip of ultrasound photos of their baby girl. “The fact that we were pregnant at all was a miracle, and we were beside ourselves with happiness,” she said. But then, 18 weeks – just four months – into her pregnancy, Amanda’s water broke. The amniotic fluid that her baby depended upon was leaking out. She says her doctor told her the baby would not survive. “We found out that we were going to lose our baby,” Amanda said. “My cervix was dilating fully 22 weeks prematurely, and I was inevitably going to miscarry.” She and Josh begged the doctor to see if there was any way to save the baby. “I just kept asking, ‘isn’t there anything we can do?’ And the answer was ‘no,’ ” Amanda said. Texas anti-abortion laws When a woman’s water breaks, she’s at high risk for a life-threatening infection. While Amanda and Josh’s baby – they named her Willow – was sure to die, she still had a heartbeat, and so doctors said that under Texas law, they were unable to terminate the pregnancy. “My doctor said, ‘Well, right now we just have to wait, because we can’t induce labor, even though you’re 100% for sure going to lose your baby,’ ” Amanda said. “[The doctors] were unable to do their own jobs because of the way that the laws are written in Texas.” Texas law allows for abortion if the mother “has a life-threatening physical condition aggravated, caused by, or arising from a pregnancy that places the female at risk of death or poses a serious risk of substantial impairment of a major bodily function.” But Texas lawmakers haven’t spelled out exactly what that means, and a doctor found to be in violation of the law can face loss of their medical license and a possible life sentence in prison. “They’re extremely vague,” said Katie Keith, director of the Health Policy and Law Initiative at Georgetown University Law Center. “They don’t spell out exactly the situations when an abortion can be provided.” In September, CNN reached out to 28 Texas legislators who sponsored anti-abortion legislation, asking them for their response to CNN stories about the woman in Houston and the woman in central Texas. Only one legislator responded. “Like any other law, there are unintended consequences. We do not want to see any unintended consequences; if we do, it is our responsibility as legislators to fix those flaws,” wrote state Sen. Eddie Lucio, who will be leaving the Senate at the end of the year. The Zurawskis participated in an ad for Beto O’Rourke’s unsuccessful Texas gubernatorial campaign. Going downhill very fast After her water broke, Amanda’s doctors sent her home and told her to watch for signs of infection, and that only when she was “considered sick enough that my life was at risk” would they terminate the pregnancy, Amanda said. “My doctor said it could take hours, it could take days, it could take weeks,” she remembers. Once they heard “hours,” they decided there was no time to travel to another state for an abortion. “The nearest ‘sanctuary’ state is at least an eight-hour drive,” Amanda wrote in an online essay on The Meteor. “Developing sepsis – which can kill quickly – in a car in the middle of the West Texas desert, or 30,000 feet above the ground, is a death sentence.” So they waited it out in Texas. On August 26, three days after her water broke, Amanda found herself shivering in the Texas heat. “We were having a heat wave, I think it was 105 degrees that day, and I was freezing cold, and I was shaking, my teeth were chattering. I was trying to tell Josh that I didn’t feel good, and my teeth were chattering so hard that I could not even get the sentence out,” she said. Josh was shocked by his wife’s condition. “To see in a matter of maybe five minutes, for her to go from a normal temperature to the condition she was in was really, really scary,” he said. “Very quickly, she went downhill very, very fast. She was in a state I’ve never seen her in.” Josh rushed his wife to the hospital. Her temperature was 102 degrees. She was too weak to walk on her own. Her temperature went up to 103 degrees. Finally, Amanda was sick enough that the doctors felt legally safe to terminate the pregnancy, she said. ‘I was really scared I was going to lose her’ But Amanda was so sick that antibiotics wouldn’t stop the bacterial infection raging through her body. A blood transfusion didn’t cure her, either. About 12 hours after her pregnancy was terminated, doctors and nurses flooded her room. “There’s a lot of commotion, and I said, ‘what’s going on?’ and they said, ‘we’re moving you to the ICU,’ and I said, ‘why?’ and they said, ‘you’re developing symptoms of sepsis,’ ” she said. Sepsis, the body’s extreme response to an infection, is a life-threatening medical emergency. Amanda’s blood pressure plummeted. Her platelets dropped. She doesn’t remember much from that time. But Josh does. “It was really scary to see Amanda crash,” he said. “I was really scared I was going to lose her.” Family members flew in from across the country because they feared it would be the last time they would see Amanda. Doctors inserted an intravenous line near her heart to deliver antibiotics and medication to stabilize her blood pressure. Finally, Amanda turned the corner and survived. ‘These barbaric laws’ But her medical ordeal isn’t over. Amanda’s uterus suffered scarring from the infection, and she may not be able to have more children. She had a surgery recently to fix the scarring, but it’s unclear whether it will be successful. That leaves the Zurawskis scared – and furious that they might never have a family because of a Texas law. “[This] didn’t have to happen,” Amanda said. “That’s what’s so infuriating about all of this, is that we didn’t have to – we shouldn’t have had to – go through all of this trauma.” The Zurawskis say the politicians who voted for the anti-abortion law call themselves “pro-life” – but they don’t see it that way. “Amanda almost died. That’s not pro-life. Amanda will have challenges in the future having more kids. That’s not pro-life,” Josh said. “Nothing about [this] feels pro-life,” his wife added. In many ways, Amanda feels fortunate. She wonders whether she’d be alive today if it weren’t for her husband, who rushed her to the hospital and made sure she got the best care possible. And they have good jobs with good health insurance and they live in a big city with high quality health care. “All of these things I had going for me, and still, this was the outcome,” she said. She and Josh worry about women in rural areas, or poor women, or young, single mothers in states like Texas. What would happen to them, considering what happened to Amanda? “These barbaric laws prevented her from getting any amount of health care when she needed it, until it was at a life-threatening moment,” Josh said.



Article: 49
News_Outlet: CNN
Title:The language we use to talk about pregnancy and abortion is changing. But not everyone welcomes the shift
Author: Harmeet Kaur
Publication_Date:  Published 6:01 AM EDT, Sun September 4, 2022
Article_Content: CNN  —  From patient waiting rooms to the halls of Congress, the language being used to talk about reproduction is shifting. Across the US, mainstream institutions such as the American Civil Liberties Union, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and CNN are increasingly opting for gender-neutral terms such as “pregnant people,” “people who get abortions” and “birthing parent” in favor of “women” when referencing pregnancy, fertility and abortion. These shifts in terminology signal an effort to be inclusive of transgender and nonbinary people who can also get pregnant. But the changes have also prompted pushback – not just from Republican politicians who are openly hostile to LGBTQ people but also from some cisgender women (women whose gender identity conforms with the sex they were assigned at birth) who consider themselves LGBTQ allies and who support abortion rights. “We’re not just talking about the same people that we were before. We’re broadening the scope,” said Kristen Syrett, an associate professor of linguistics at Rutgers University. “And I think that’s where people get more uncomfortable because it’s so different from the way we’ve been thinking of reproductive rights and pregnancy for a long time.” Debates about language can seem arbitrary at a time when so many no longer have access to abortion services in their home state. But at the crux of these debates are questions about who is targeted by restrictive laws and policies, who is affected and who is included in the conversation. Advocates say inclusive terms make room for everyone affected Using inclusive language to talk about abortion recognizes that not only cis women can get pregnant, said Gillian Branstetter, a communications strategist at the ACLU’s Women’s Rights Project and LGBTQ & HIV Project. Some trans men and nonbinary people can also get pregnant, as can cis girls and trans boys. This is also true in the opposite: Not all women are able to get pregnant. Some cis women struggle with fertility, while trans women lack uteruses. Opting for gender-neutral terms such as “people” or “patients” allows for these nuances in a way that just saying “women” does not. There’s scant data on how many trans and nonbinary people get pregnant and receive abortions given that medical systems in the US track them as female. A 2019 study from Rutgers University suggests that up to 30% of trans men experience unplanned pregnancies, and a 2020 study from researchers at the Guttmacher Institute and Planned Parenthood estimated between 462 and 530 trans and nonbinary people received abortions in 2017 (the CDC reports that approximately 609,000 total abortions were performed that year). As more adults identify as trans or nonbinary, experts say that such estimates are likely undercounted. Still, those numbers pale in comparison to the numbers of cis women who access reproductive health care – a point often made by critics of more inclusive terms. Branstetter acknowledged this reality, noting that “99% of people who are going to become pregnant or are in need of birth control or an abortion are women.” But it’s necessary to make room for trans and nonbinary people precisely because of the significant barriers they face in receiving reproductive care, she added. “It’s important to remember that transgender people do not have the privilege of pretending we do not exist.” Some feel gender-neutral terms erase the role of sexism Others are concerned that forgoing the term “women” obscures what they see as the driving force behind attacks on abortion rights: Misogyny. Carrie Baker, professor of the study of women and gender at Smith College, considers gender-neutral terms such as “pregnant people” to be inaccurate and imprecise. In theory, she said, “people” also includes cisgender men, whose bodies are not affected by abortion restrictions. Baker said she recognizes the importance of being inclusive, and tries to reference in her writing when possible the various groups who are affected by abortion restrictions. But because she sees cisgender women as the primary targets of abortion bans, she said she makes it a point to emphasize women. Not doing so, Baker said, erases the sexism underlying laws that seek to exert control over women’s bodies. “‘Pregnant people’ doesn’t say who we’re talking about. It makes (pregnancy) sound like it’s a gender-neutral phenomenon or a sex-neutral phenomenon,” she added. “I believe that bans on abortion are motivated by sex discrimination and by bias against women and cisgender women, or just femininity.” As some abortion rights supporters now look to the Equal Rights Amendment to establish a constitutional right to abortion, Baker said being explicit about the role of sexism in abortion restrictions is necessary to challenge such laws. Doing that effectively, in her view, means naming women. “I think we need to talk about that or we, in essence, do what the right does, which is trying to erase the significance of the discriminatory impact of abortion bans,” Baker said. Some have gone as far as to suggest that women as a class are being erased. Earlier this year, The New York Times opinion columnist Pamela Paul decried the use of terms such as “pregnant people” in a piece, writing that “This isn’t just a semantic issue; it’s also a question of moral harm, an affront to our very sense of ourselves.” The Atlantic’s Helen Lewis accused the left of “declaring a war on saying ‘women.’” “By substituting people for women, we lose the ability to speak of women as a class. We dismantle them into pieces, into functions, into commodities,” she argued. Syrett, the Rutgers University linguist, understands where these anxieties are coming from, but encourages people to reflect on what they’re signaling with their word choices. “It seems natural for some individuals to (feel) like this is taking away something or maybe it’s not honoring a part of what they’ve associated with womanhood for so long,” she said. “It’s an opportunity for everyone, regardless of their own stance with respect to reproductive issues or their own experience, to take a step back and ask what it means to talk about ‘women’ versus ‘females’ versus ‘people with the ability to reproduce.’” Others say the debate presents a false dichotomy For the ACLU’s Branstetter, claims that women are being erased are overblown. Progressive organizations are opting for terms such as “pregnant people” in their own public messaging campaigns, but no one is forcing women to stop describing themselves as such, she said. Additionally, the word “women” continues to be centered in many national conversations about abortion – from the Women’s Health Protection Act that sought to codify Roe v. Wade to the Supreme Court ruling Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization that overturned it. “I think that the demise of the word ‘woman’ is greatly exaggerated,” Branstetter said. “And I don’t think that there’s any harm in making space for the many people who do need this care who are not women.” Advocates of more inclusive terms also feel that such debates present a false dichotomy. Oliver Hall, trans health director for the Kentucky Health Justice Network, said critics of terms such as “pregnant people” are missing the ways that trans and nonbinary people are also hurt by misogyny. Recognizing what drives abortion restrictions and making space for trans and nonbinary people aren’t mutually exclusive, they added. “I think people feel like not just saying ‘women’ means that we can’t talk about the role that misogyny plays in these laws,” Hall said. “But I think that also does a disservice to trans people who are also affected not just by those laws, but by misogyny as a whole.” Including trans and nonbinary people in the fight for abortion rights doesn’t mean taking away something from cisgender women, Hall said. Rather, a more inclusive coalition has the potential to strengthen the abortion rights movement. At the heart of abortion bans is a desire to uphold traditional gender roles, Branstetter said, comparing them to attempts to ban gender-affirming care. “What the effort to ban abortion and the effort to erase transgender people from public life have in common is the enforcement of a very strict gender binary based on the exploitation of reproductive labor,” she said. “That is a more complicated story to tell than ‘They’re doing it because they hate women.’ But it’s a truer one.”





Article: 50
News_Outlet: CNN
Title:The 150-year-old chastity law that may be the next big fight over abortion
Author: Tierney Sneed
Publication_Date: Updated 2:13 PM EDT, Fri April 28, 2023
Article_Content: CNN  —  A law passed 150 years ago that banned the mailing of contraceptives, lewd materials and drugs that induce abortions could provide a pathway for effectively banning abortion nationwide – even in states where the procedure is legal. When the Supreme Court last summer reversed Roe v. Wade and eliminated constitutional protections that guaranteed abortion rights nationwide, the conservative majority fashioned its ruling as returning the matter of abortion policy-making to elected officials, particularly in state legislatures. But the battle lines now being drawn around the Reconstruction-era federal law – the Comstock Act – are an example of how the picture after Roe v. Wade is far more complicated as abortion opponents are challenging the means of abortion, such as the drug mifepristone, in court. The most sweeping Comstock Act arguments from anti-abortion activists could at the very least end the availability of medication abortion, which make up the majority of abortions in the US today, and could have the effect of eliminating surgical abortions as well by restricting the shipment of medical instruments and supplies used in the procedure. “Comstock is really the backdoor way to remove access to abortion across the whole country,” said Greer Donley, a University of Pittsburgh Law School professor who specializes in abortion law. A fight over the reach of the law and how it can be deployed is beginning to brew in court. It has also been on the radar of state and local officials. But the end goal is a GOP-led federal government willing and empowered to wield the law in a way that could make it impossible for abortion providers to operate. If the current proxy legal battles over the statute’s meaning unfold in the way abortion opponents hope, enforcement of the law could be a central issue in the 2024 White House race and congressional campaigns, given federal lawmakers’ power to repeal it. Now that Roe is gone’ The Comstock Act, first passed in 1873, is named after Anthony Comstock, who was a special agent of the US Postal Service and an anti-vice crusader. The law’s critics say it’s discriminatory against women, pointing out that at the time of its adoption, women could not vote and the Supreme Court had not yet interpreted the Constitutional Equal Protection Clause to prohibit sex discrimination. The statute bans the mailing of articles or things “designed, adapted, or intended for producing abortion, or for any indecent or immoral use,” and in a separate section, describes its prohibition as being on “any drug, medicine, article, or thing designed, adapted, or intended for producing abortion.” Prosecutions under the law were bought in the first few decades after its passage, but by the 1930s, courts began whittling down some of its provisions and enforcement of the law ceased. Congress meanwhile amended it in the 1970s to remove its ban on mailing birth control. Anti-abortion activists contend, however, that the part of the statute having to do with abortion-inducing drug remains good law, even if there was no appetite for enforcing it while the Supreme Court’s 1973 Roe v. Wade precedent – which protected abortion rights nationwide – was on the books. That precedent was overturned by the high court’s conservative majority last June. “Now that Roe is gone, the law springs back into life,” said Roger Severino, the vice president of domestic policy at the conservative think tank, the Heritage Foundation, who also served as a top civil rights lawyer in the Department of Health and Human Services under the Trump administration. Severino argued that, at least when it comes to the Comstock Act’s prohibitions on mailing abortion pills, Congress is well within its powers to regulate those shipments. While prominent anti-abortion lawyers are focused on how the law applies to the mailing of abortion drugs, the maximalist interpretations being put forward by some abortion foes would mean that tools and medical instruments that facilitate surgical abortions that are shipped in the mail to clinics and other facilities would be caught in the Comstock Act’s net. “If Comstock comes to life, it has power to ban abortion nationwide. … It’s not just pills,” Donley said. “Any abortion provider in the country is going to use the mail to get the things that they need for the provision of abortion.” ‘The Supreme Court is going to have to address this issue’ Already, the Comstock Act has played a cameo role in the ongoing, high-stakes lawsuit over the US Food and Drug’s Administration regulation of abortion pills, which made it up to the Supreme Court once and is likely to land with the justices again. The Supreme Court froze lower court orders that would have curtailed access to a medication abortion drug, but litigation over its use will continue, raising the possibility that the Comstock Act could play a more central role in that case. Depending on how the legal battle plays out, it could empower the Justice Department in a possible future Republican administration to bring prosecutions under the law, which could complicate – or perhaps even end – access to abortion. In the meantime, the anti-abortion movement appears to be looking for ways to tee up disputes over whether the law is enforceable and how far it reaches. “The Supreme Court is going to have to address this issue, sooner rather than later,” said Mark Lee Dickson, an anti-abortion activist who has been involved in local efforts to seize upon the US law. He sees the Comstock Act as a “de facto federal abortion ban.” Both sides of the abortion debate acknowledge that the clearest test of what the Comstock Act means likely wouldn’t emerge until a Republican takes the White House and puts in place Justice Department leadership that would be willing to enforce the law. The Biden administration has adopted a legal posture that takes a narrow view of the law’s applicability, arguing that it does not prohibit the mailing of abortion drugs if they’re not intended for an unlawful use. If the Supreme Court endorses the broad interpretation of the law put forward by anti-abortion activists, it would raise the stakes “significantly” for the 2024 election, said Mary Ziegler, a UC-Davis School of Law professor and author of “Abortion and the Law in America: Roe v. Wade to the Present.” “You would have essentially on the ballot the question of both Comstock enforcement and also potentially Comstock repeal,” Ziegler said. “Do I think, under a Trump presidency, they’re going to confiscate surgical gloves because they could be adapted for use in abortion? No, I don’t think that’s probably going to happen,” Ziegler added. “But the language is so broad that it really would be the license to go after a lot of things beyond just abortion pills.” The Biden administration, in an internal advisory opinion released by the Justice Department’s Office of Legal Counsel, argues that the law does not apply to the mailing of abortion pills if they’re not being sent with the intent of unlawful use. The opinion pointed to how 20th century courts had interpreted it narrowly as excluding drugs mailed with legitimate intent. (OLC opinions dictate how executive branch agencies approach legal questions but do not have any binding effect in the court of law.) The opinion was rolled out just before the FDA unveiled new rules around abortion pills that allow pharmacies to dispense the drug. The Comstock Act has been invoked in the challenge to the FDA’s 2000 approval of the medication abortion drug mifepristone, where the plaintiffs – anti-abortion doctors and medical organizations – are arguing that the FDA broke the law by failing to take its criminal prohibitions into account when approving the drug. There are also questions about whether the law applies not just to medication abortion, but to the tools used for surgical abortions as well. A lawyer representing the anti-abortion doctors in the current FDA case told CNN they’re not focused on that question while their assertions about mailing abortion pills play out in court. Under-the-radar cases touting the law The challenge to the FDA’s 2000 approval of the drug used for medication abortion is not the only case where courts are being asked to expound upon the Comstock Act’s reach. Several towns, some in New Mexico and elsewhere, have passed local ordinances that cite the Comstock Act and prohibit business within those jurisdictions from shipping or receiving items used for abortions in the mail, as covered by the Comstock Act. Dickson, who is director of Right to Life of East Texas and has advocated for the passage of the ordinances, said part of the focus in where the ordinances are being passed is towns in the border regions of blue states that abortion clinic organizations may be eying for new facilities. The lawsuits in New Mexico state court that those ordinances have prompted may provide for another opportunity for courts to elaborate on what the Comstock Act means. The state Supreme Court is dominated by Democratic justices. But getting multiple courts to interpret the law and create judicial disagreement about its meaning appears to be part of the anti-abortion movement’s strategy for encouraging the US Supreme Court to weigh in. One case is a challenge to some of the ordinances that New Mexico Attorney General Raúl Torrez filed to the state Supreme Court early this year. His briefs argue that the Comstock Act is irrelevant to the questions before the high New Mexico court, and he is asserting that the ordinances run afoul of state law and the state constitution. However, a second case has been brought by the city of Eunice – a New Mexico town near the Texas border that passed its own ordinance that was not covered in Torrez’s lawsuit. Eunice is asking for a court ruling that would interpret the Comstock Act as outlawing “all shipment and receipt of abortion pills and abortion-related paraphernalia throughout the United States, regardless of whether the sender” intends the items to be used unlawfully. The city argues that the ordinance should be allowed to stand because the federal 1873 law trumps New Mexico law and the state constitution. In Texas, the Comstock Act has been raised in a wrongful death lawsuit that a man has filed against friends of his ex-wife who allegedly helped her procure abortion drugs to terminate a pregnancy. The lawsuit claims that the manufacturer of the pills has criminal liability under the law while alleging that criminal liability extends to the two people who are accused of helping the ex-wife procure the pills. Jonathan Mitchell, the architect of Texas’ ground-breaking civil enforcement six-week abortion ban, is involved in both the Texas wrongful death case and the lawsuit Eunice has brought. A coalition of Republican state attorneys general, meanwhile, invoked the Comstock Act in a February letter to pharmacy chains, warning the companies that private litigation could be used to enforce the law against them if the pharmacies seek to dispense abortion pills in their states. “I really believe the abortion industry is going to find themselves Comstock-ed, one way or the other,” Dickson said. “They’re going to find these federal statutes coming down upon them one way or the other.” The Comstock Act’s role in the blockbuster abortion pill case While those cases percolate, the case against the FDA for its approval of mifepristone will move forward and is almost guaranteed to land back before the Supreme Court. The lawsuit, however, does not make for the perfect vehicle for settling the questions about the Comstock Act’s prosecutorial potency, as the FDA plays no role in enforcing the law. Instead, the plaintiffs are using the Comstock Act to argue that the FDA should have never approved the drug, which has been on the marketplace for nearly 23 years, in the first place. “The FDA went above and beyond just approving the drug,” Erik Baptist, the lawyer for the plaintiffs, told CNN while pointing to the distribution plan submitted to the FDA at the time showing how the drugs would be shipped. “It actually requires something of the drug manufacturer that is explicitly illegal.” At least in the very conservative pockets of the judiciary where the first two rounds of the litigation over the abortion pill’s FDA approval played out, the anti-abortion movement has gotten some traction with its assertions about the Comstock Act’s breadth. US District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk, who issued a now-frozen ruling that would have halted the approval of the drug, agreed with the plaintiffs’ assertions about the Comstock Act, calling the narrower reading of the law being pushed by the DOJ “unpersuasive.” The US 5th Circuit Court of Appeals – when it put some aspects of Kacsmaryk’s ruling on hold but left untouched parts of the order that blocked FDA’s policy allowing the drugs to be mailed to patients – suggested it was inclined to view the law the same way, even as it stopped short of fully adopting Kacsmaryk’s holding that mailing the drugs violated the 1873 law. The Supreme Court, in the emergency order it issued last week, did not say anything about the Comstock Act. But legal experts anticipate that abortion foes will continue to tout the law in this and other cases. “They are going to use every effort to try to get the question of the Comstock Act before the Supreme Court,” said David Cohen, a professor at the Drexel Kline School of Law and co-author of the book “Obstacle Course: The Everyday Struggle to Get an Abortion in America.”





