
Article: 1
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Cosmopolitan magazine shares steps for how to have a 'Satanic Abortion Ceremony'
Author: Alexander Hall 
Publication_Date: Published December 3, 2023 9:00am EST
Article_Content: The ritual as described is concluded by declaring, 'By my body, my blood; by my will, it is done' Pro-life Democrat challenging Biden discusses plan to show abortion victims in TV ad. Democratic presidential candidate and pro-life activist Terrisa Bukovinac tells Fox News Digital about her plan to run an ad showing the victims of abortion. Cosmopolitan, a popular magazine for young women, shared with readers how they could have a ritualized abortion service via an abortion facility named after Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito's mother. Cosmopolitan explained on its Instagram page on Nov. 16 about the process of having a Satanic-themed abortion. It specifically addressed a "ceremonial" service provided at the "Samuel Alito’s Mom’s Satanic Abortion Clinic," named as an insult to Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito.  "What’s it like to have a Satanic abortion? For Jessica* [a fake name to keep the woman anonymous], a 37-year-old mother of three who received abortion medication via Samuel Alito’s Mom’s Satanic Clinic, ‘the experience was just very supportive,’" Cosmopolitan wrote in an Instagram post. "While she’s not a Satanist, Jessica decided to incorporate a few ceremonial elements into her solo abortion experience. ‘Why not?’ she thought. The overall messaging just clicked with her."  The post shared a series of slides elaborating on the steps of how to have a ritualized abortion ceremony as prescribed by The Satanic Temple. This included steps such as staring at one’s reflection before taking an abortion pill and saying, "One’s body is inviolable, subject to one’s own will alone." Statue Satanic Temple The Baphomet statue is seen in the conversion room at the Satanic Temple. The Satanic Temple opened up an abortion clinic in New Mexico. PENTAGON TO PROVIDE TRAVEL FOR SERVICE MEMBERS GETTING ABORTIONS, PLUS PAID TIME OFF The ritual is later concluded by declaring, "By my body, my blood; by my will, it is done." The slides also attest one can "include as many loved ones as they’d like" in the ceremony and "light candles or even dress up — whatever makes them feel empowered." Shortly before that post, Cosmopolitan had shared an article about the Satanic abortion clinic, speculating on an alternate timeline where the mother of Alito had chosen abortion instead of birthing him. "But what if her circumstances had been different — if her own life had been endangered by the pregnancy or if the fetus had a fatal anomaly or if Rose simply hadn’t been ready for a child? What if she’d had a choice and access to safe, legal abortion care?" the magazine asked. "Nearly 75 years later, in a reproductive rights landscape that feels like it’s sliding back in time, one group decided to channel this policy fantasy into a new health care enterprise named in her honor." The premise of this clinic, as Cosmopolitan described, is to use religion as a means to protect abortion rights. Satanic temple Christmas tree In this photo illustration, the Satanic temple in Wisconsin was featured in a Christmas tree display from a local museum. (Fox News Digital) SEN. TUBERVILLE RIPS BIDEN FOR USING VA, PENTAGON TO PROMOTE ABORTION: ‘SHAMEFUL’ "By TST’s accounting, no other faith-based group in the U.S. has ever launched an abortion clinic," the magazine noted. "And that’s the game-changing twist here: Unlike other abortion-pill-by-mail providers like Hey Jane or Abuzz, TST is a religion. Meaning its patients, who don’t have to be Satanists themselves, are participating in a religious ritual." The publication added: "That’s a key legal distinction TST hopes to leverage in its historic push to expand its clinic model beyond New Mexico — into states where abortion is otherwise banned." Cosmopolitan did not immediately respond to FOX News Digital's request for comment. Unregulated, unlimited abortion is wrong: Madison Gesiotto Gilbert




Article: 2
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Tuberville ends blockade of most military promotions after months-long abortion fight
Author: Chris Pandolfo 
Publication_Date: Published December 5, 2023 2:11pm EST Updated December 5, 2023 2:46pm EST
Article_Content: Sen. Tommy Tuberville, R-Ala., cleared the way for hundreds of military promotions to advance by ending his protest of the Pentagon's abortion policy. Tuberville under fire from GOP for continuing to hold up military promotions FOX News senior congressional correspondent Chad Pergram reports on the backlash over Sen. Tommy Tuberville, R-Ala., holding up military promotions on 'FOX Report.' Sen. Tommy Tuberville, R-Ala., announced on Tuesday he is finally backing down from his hold on hundreds of military promotions to protest the Pentagon's abortion policy. Tuberville told reporters he would release all holds except for four-star generals after a nine-month long protest that angered several of his colleagues, including Republicans who feared the stalled promotions would impact military readiness. The former college football coach claimed he could not continue his hold after Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., "changed the rules" in the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA), an annual must-pass defense spending bill. "I'd love to have had five downs in football instead of four, but you can't do it. It's got to be fair for everybody," Tuberville said. "So that being said, I'm not going to hold the promotions of these people any longer. We just released them." Sen. Tommy Tuberville, R-Ala., arrives for the Senate Armed Services Committee confirmation hearing on Wednesday, July 26, 2023. Tuberville began blocking President Biden's military nominations in February over what he said was the Pentagon's "illegal" policy of providing travel expense reimbursement to service members who seek an abortion. The Biden administration adopted the policy last year in response to the Supreme Court's ruling in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, which overturned Roe v. Wade and held the U.S. Constitution does not confer a right to abortion.  Almost 400 military nominations have since been in limbo due to Tuberville’s blanket hold on confirmations and promotions for senior military officers. It’s a Tuberville's opponents say has left key national security positions unfilled and military families with an uncertain path forward. Tuberville maintained his hold on military promotions for nine months before Senate Democrats attempted to out-maneuver him with a rules change. In October, a bipartisan group of lawmakers planned to maneuver around Tuberville's hold by introducing a rules change in the Senate Rules Committee that would allow them to approve a batch of nominees through 2024. Majority Leader Schumer last week said he would bring a resolution to the Senate floor that would adopt the rules change and circumvent Tuberville. Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., said he would move forward with military promotions as soon as possible, and that he hopes no one will attempt Tuberville's strategy again. After Tuberville's announcement, Schumer spoke at a press conference and said that lawmakers would move the delayed military promotions as soon as Tuesday afternoon. "I want to say, in regarding Senator Tuberville, in regards to Tuberville finally lifting his unnecessary and harmful holds on our nation's military officials, I'm happy that we can finally move forward and give these men and women the promotions they deserve. I plan to move these promotions as soon as possible, possibly later this afternoon," Schumer said. He added, "I hope no one does this again, and I hope they learn the lesson of Senator Tuberville. And that is: He held out for many, many months, hurt our national security, caused discombobulation to so many military families who have been so dedicated to our country and didn't get anything he wanted. It's a risky strategy that will not succeed. I hope it doesn't happen again."   







Article: 3
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Haley calls for 'consensus' on issue of abortion, as Pence says that is 'the opposite of leadership'
Author: Brooke Singman
Publication_Date: Published August 23, 2023 10:19pm EDT
Article_Content: GOP candidates were asked if they would support a federal abortion ban. Pence attacks Haley on 'consensus' abortion position: That's 'the opposite of leadership. Former Vice President Mike Pence goes after Nikki Haley for her answer on whether she supports a six-week abortion ban. Former Amb. Nikki Haley and former Vice President Mike Pence went head-to-head on the issue of abortion Wednesday night, with Haley calling for "consensus" on the issue and Pence firing back that would be "the opposite of leadership." The Republican presidential candidates were asked during the first GOP primary debate Wednesday night about the issue of abortion and whether they would support a nationwide abortion ban. Haley, the only female GOP presidential candidate, said she is "unapologetically pro-life." Nikki Haley Former US Ambassador Nikki Haley at Wednesday night's first GOP debate in Milwaukee. (Fox News) "Not because the Republican Party tells me to be, but because my husband was adopted and I had trouble having both of my children—so I’m surrounded by blessings," Haley said. "Having said that, we need to stop demonizing this issue." The Supreme Court, last year, overturned the 1973 landmark case, Roe v. Wade, bringing the issue of abortion back to the states for the first time in nearly 50 years. "Now, it has been put in the hands of the people," Haley said. But as for a federal ban, Haley said politicians "need to be honest with the American people and say it will take 60 Senate votes, it will take a majority of the House." "So, in order to do that, let’s find consensus," she said. "Can't we all agree that we should ban late-term abortions? Can’t we all agree that we should encourage adoptions? Can’t we all agree that doctors and nurses who don’t believe in abortion shouldn't have to perform them? Can't we all agree that contraception should be available? And can’t we all agree that we are not going to put a woman in jail or give her the death penalty if she gets an abortion?" Mike Pence slams Vivek Ramaswamy at Wednesday night's first GOP debate in Milwaukee.   (Fox News) She added: "Let’s treat this like the respectful issue that it is and humanize the situation and stop demonizing the situation."  But Pence fired back, maintaining his pro-life record, but slamming Haley’s push for "consensus." "You're my friend, but consensus is the opposite of leadership," Pence said. "When the Supreme Court returned this question to the American people, they didn’t just send it to the states only—it is not a states-only issue. It is a moral issue." Pence vowed that if elected, he would be a "champion for life in the Oval Office." "It is going to take unapologetic leadership—leadership that stand on principle and expresses compassion for women in crisis pregnancies—I will do that as President of the United States," Pence said. But Haley offered a rebuttal, saying that a federal ban is far-fetched. "No Republican president can ban abortions any more than a Democrat president could ban all those state laws," she said. "Don’t make women feel like they have to decide on this issue, when you know we don’t have 60 Senate votes."  She added: "You have to be honest with the American people."







Article: 4
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Ron DeSantis signs six-week abortion law, delighting pro-lifers and ‘devastating’ abortion supporters
Author: Gabriel Hays
Publication_Date: Published April 14, 2023 11:30am EDT
Article_Content: Florida pro-lifers were overjoyed at the governor's move, while abortion supporters reacted with anger. Republican Sen. Tim Scott of South Carolina, says he would definitely support a 20-week federal ban on abortions
Republican Sen. Tim Scott of South Carolina, says he would definitely support a 20-week federal ban on abortions, and possibly a 15-week ban. And Scott criticizes Democrats for supporting "lack of restrictions." Gov. Ron DeSantis, R-Fla., caused a flurry of both joyous and distraught reactions by signing a bill to ban abortions in his state after six weeks of pregnancy. DeSantis announced that he signed SB 300, dubbed the "Heartbeat Protection Act," on Thursday evening. Passed to his desk by the Republican-majority state legislature, the bill bans abortions after six weeks of pregnancy, though allows some exceptions for victims of rape and incest. The new bill stipulates that abortions for these women can be sought up to 15 weeks into pregnancy, if a woman has documentation related to the incidents, such as a police report or restraining order, the AP claimed in its report. Pro-lifers surround DeSantis' desk as he signs Heartbeat Protection Act Republican Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida signed the Heartbeat Protection Act into law on Thursday, April 13, 2023. (Twitter/Ron DeSantis) The bill becoming Florida law does hinge on whether the conservative-majority state Supreme Court upholds Florida's current 15-week ban. That ban, enacted a year ago, is ongoing a legal challenge at this time. The news prompted split reaction on Twitter Thursday evening and Friday morning, with prominent pro-abortion figures decrying the bill signing, and pro-life figures rejoicing in it. Senior HuffPost reporter Alanna Vagianos wrote, "A six-week abortion ban will devastate access not only for Floridians but also for people seeking care across the southeast. Florida had become a safe haven for abortion care since SCOTUS repealed Roe & a dozen or so states have enacted near-total bans, mostly in the southeast." In a subsequent post, she wrote, "Important to note that these bans disproportionately affect low-income people, women of color, people who live in rural areas and trans & gender-nonconforming folks. Less than a year after Dobbs & nearly the entire southeast is likely to become an abortion care desert." Live Action founder and pro-life activist Lila Rose praised DeSantis’ move. She tweeted, "BREAKING: @RonDeSantisFL has signed a bill protecting most preborn children 6 weeks gestational age and older from the violence of abortion! This is a big win for Florida and the nation. The next step is completely ending abortion and protecting all of Florida's children." Prominent Democrat Twitter activist @JoJoFromJerz fretted over the decision, and tried to work in a condemnation of Florida’s pro-Second Amendment policies into her complaint. She tweeted, "In the state of Florida, women will soon be unable to seek an abortion after only six weeks of pregnancy. And yet, just about anyone can carry a concealed and LOADED firearm in public without a permit or training. This ain’t about ‘protecting life’. It’s about controlling women." Feminist author and frequent MSNBC guest Molly Jong-Fast insisted that DeSantis is "Alienating the center and delighting the base." Florida Governor Ron DeSantis gives a political speech Florida Governor Ron DeSantis gives a political speech at the Cradle of Aviation Museum, April 1, 2023 in Garden City, New York. The country’s largest abortion provider Planned Parenthood sent out a reassuring tweet to all those lamenting the restrictions that my enacted in the state. Its account wrote, "Florida, we’re here with you. As abortion bans sweep the country, it can be confusing to figure out how to get the care you need. Your access to health care is our highest priority, no matter where you live." Pro-life activist Abby Johnson claimed DeSantis signing the bill is "one step closer to protecting children from the moment of conception just like they deserve." Governor Kathy Hochul, D-N.Y., weighed in on the bill’s approval, tweeting, "Dangerous and shameful. In New York, we’ll always protect your right to abortion care." Conservative legal organization Alliance Defending Freedom celebrated the signing, writing, "By enacting the Heartbeat Protection Act, Florida is continuing its work to protect the health of pregnant mothers, the dignity of the unborn, and the integrity of the medical profession.  We commend @GovRonDeSantis for taking a stand to preserve life." Students For Life President Kristan Hawkins thanks the Florida governor, tweeting, "Florida will no longer be the fifth highest abortion state in the nation thanks to the Heartbeat Protection Act. Thank you @GovRonDeSantis for having the courage to do the right thing. You are setting the standard for GOP and they should follow your lead." And author Stephen King weighed in on the issue, saying, "It has been said before, but it bears repeating: if men could get pregnant, abortion would be a sacrament." Abortion protest Abortion rights protesters cheer at a rally following the United States Supreme Court's decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, federally protected right to abortion, outside the state capitol in Lansing, Mich. The Michigan Court of Appeals ruled Monday, Aug. 1, 2022, that county prosecutors can enforce the state's 91-year-old abortion ban, paving the way for abortion to become illegal in parts of the state. 






Article: 5
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Supreme Court overturns Roe v. Wade in landmark abortion decision
Author:   Ronn Blitzer , Kelly Laco
Publication_Date: Published June 24, 2022 10:11am EDT Updated June 24, 2022 12:09pm EDT
Article_Content: Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade centered on a Mississippi law banning abortions after 15 weeks. Supreme Court strikes down Roe v. Wade Fox News' chief legal correspondent Shannon Bream provides details on the Supreme Court's ruling that reverses the long-standing precedent on abortion in America. The Supreme Court on Friday overturned Roe v. Wade, effectively ending recognition of a constitutional right to abortion and giving individual states the power to allow, limit, or ban the practice altogether. The ruling came in the court's opinion in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which centered on a Mississippi law that banned abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy. The Republican-led state of Mississippi asked the Supreme Court to strike down a lower court ruling that stopped the 15-week abortion ban from taking place. "We end this opinion where we began. Abortion presents a profound moral question. The Constitution does not prohibit the citizens of each State from regulating or prohibiting abortion. Roe and Casey arrogated that authority. We now overrule those decisions and return that authority to the people and their elected representatives," Justice Samuel Alito wrote in the court's opinion. Alito's opinion began with an exploration and criticism of Roe v. Wade and its holding that while states have "a legitimate interest in protecting ‘potential life,'' this interest was not strong enough to prohibit abortions before the time of fetal viability, understood to be at about 23 weeks into pregnancy. "The Court did not explain the basis for this line, and even abortion supporters have found it hard to defend Roe’s reasoning," Alito wrote. Chief Justice John Roberts agreed that the viability line "never made any sense," but said he would have taken "a more measured course" with this case. Rather than overturn Roe v. Wade altogether, Roberts said he would have continued to recognize a right to get an abortion, and that the right should "extend far enough to ensure a reasonable opportunity to choose, but need not extend any further." The court's majority took a firmer stance against Roe v. Wade and the subsequent case Planned Parenthood v. Casey, holding "that Roe and Casey must be overruled." They countered the Roberts concurrence by claiming that such an approach "would only put off the day when we would be forced to confront the question we now decide." The court described how the Roe opinion did not specifically explain where the right to abortion came from, rather it provided several areas of the Constitution that might provide such a right. Alito wrote that the Casey decision "did not defend this unfocused analysis," instead grounding the right in the "liberty" protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The court's opinion recognized that the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause has been found to guarantee certain rights that are not spelled out in the Constitution, but that those rights are "deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition." Abortion, the court said, "does not fall within this category," as "such a right was entirely unknown in American law" until the late 20th century. The earliest sources for a right to an abortion, the Court said, are "a few" state and district court decisions from "shortly before Roe," and "a small number of law review articles from the same time period." Alito referenced the dissenting opinion from Justices Stephen Breyer, Elena Kagan, and Sonia Sotomayor, stating that it "is very candid that it cannot show that a constitutional right to abortion has any foundation, let alone a ‘deeply rooted’ one, ‘in this Nation’s history and tradition.’" "The dissent's failure to engage with this long tradition is devastative to its position," Alito wrote. Bret Baier: SCOTUS decision on Roe v. Wade a 'political earthquake'Video The majority opinion also noted that the dissent did not provide any "serious discussion" of the states' interest in protecting the life of a fetus, while also making clear that the Court's ruling "is not based on any view about if and when prenatal life is entitled to any of the rights enjoyed after birth." The court then addressed the concept of stare decisis – the tradition of following established court precedent. "Overruling a precedent is a serious matter," Alito wrote. "It is not a step that should be taken lightly." Still, he said, if the Supreme Court never overturned precedent, "American constitutional law as we know it would be unrecognizable, and this would be a different country." The Court then asserted that there are five reasons why Roe and Casey should be overruled: "the nature of their error, the quality of their reasoning, the ‘workability’ of the rules they imposed on the country, their disruptive effect on other areas of the law, and the absence of concrete reliance." Protestors react to the overturning of Roe v Wade Video The Court explained that Casey's test of whether a law places an "undue burden" on the ability to get an abortion "has scored poorly on the workability scale," citing the late Justice Antonin Scalia, who said that the test is "inherently standardless." The majority criticized Casey for its vagueness and ambiguity, and its failure to give a "clear answer" as to how to apply its undue burden test. The opinion went on to explain that Roe and Casey disrupted other areas of law, claiming that they "have diluted the strict standard for facial constitutional challenges," ignored key judicial principles, and "distorted First Amendment doctrines." Addressing the issue of reliance, the Court stated that such an interest typically arises "where advance planning of great precision is most obviously a necessity." Alito wrote that Casey itself "conceded that those traditional reliance interests were not implicated because getting an abortion is generally ‘unplanned activity." As for Casey's claim that people have made decisions about their relationships in reliance on abortion being an available option, the Court said that this is not concrete enough, and that "this Court is ill-equipped to assess ‘generalized assertions about the national psyche.’" Alito then addressed the argument made in Casey that "[t]he American people’s belief in the rule of law would be shaken if they lost respect for this Court as an institution that decides important cases based on principle, not ‘social and political pressures.’" While he recognized that there is indeed "a special danger" that the public will view a decision this way, Alito countered that "we cannot allow our decisions to be affected by any extraneous influences such as concern about the public’s reaction to our work." Public reaction to a possible overruling of Roe well before the Court handed down Friday's decision. A leak of a draft opinion by Alito from February that reached the same conclusion caused nationwide debate and promoted pro-choice activist protests at the homes of the six conservative justices. In addition, dozens of pro-life pregnancy centers were vandalized since the opinion leak, Catholic churches were targeted for protests and unrest, and a suspect was charged with attempted murder for allegedly trying to assassinate Justice Brett Kavanaugh. Despite this, Alito wrote that the response to the Court's ruling was unknown at the time the case was decided, nor would it matter. "We do not pretend to know how our political system or society will respond to today’s decision overruling Roe and Casey. And even if we could foresee what will happen, we would have no authority to let that knowledge influence our decision," he wrote. "We therefore hold that the Constitution does not confer a right to abortion. Roe and Casey must be overruled, and the authority to regulate abortion must be returned to the people and their elected representatives." As for any future constitutional challenges to abortion restrictions, the Court said those laws should generally be valid as long as they have a rational basis. Supreme Court Roe v. Wade decision announced People protest about abortion, Friday, June 24, 2022, outside the Supreme Court in Washington. The dissent accused the majority of ignoring a woman's interest in making decisions about child bearing for herself. "It says that from the very moment of fertilization, a woman has no rights to speak of. A State can force her to bring a pregnancy to term, even at the steepest personal and familial costs," Breyer, Kagan and Sotomayor said. "Across a vast array of circumstances, a State will be able to impose its moral choice on a woman and coerce her to give birth to a child," they added. The dissent also claimed that the court's ruling jeopardizes other rights, such as the rights to contraception and same-sex marriage. "They are all part of the same constitutional fabric, protecting autonomous decisionmaking over the most personal of life decisions," the dissenting justices said. A number of Republican-led states have already passed "trigger laws," in the event Roe was overturned, that would immediately restrict access to abortion. Georgia, Iowa, Ohio and South Carolina all have laws banning abortions after the six-week mark, which have been ruled unconstitutional but would likely be revisited if Roe is overturned, the Guttmacher Institute, a pro-abortion research group, has reported. On the other hand, pro-choice advocates will have to work to codify Roe or enact looser abortion restrictions by passing state-level legislation. New York passed a bill in 2018 designed to codify Roe, and other blue states are expected to follow suit after the Supreme Court's ruling. Public opinion polling has also indicated that despite that more than six in 10 registered voters think the court should uphold Roe, the majority of Americans are in favor of some restrictions on abortion. Supreme Court Roe v. Wade decision announced Demonstrators protest about abortion outside the Supreme Court in Washington, Friday, June 24, 2022. When Americans were asked in a recent Fox News poll about how they would feel if a law banning abortions after 15 weeks were passed in their state, just over half of voters favor it (54%) while 41% are opposed. At the federal level, the Senate failed to advance a bill to codify federal abortion protections in Roe v. Wade in the week following the leaked draft. Vice President Kamala Harris presided over the vote on the Women’s Health Protection Act. It needed 60 votes to advance but died in a 51 to 49 tally, with West Virginia Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin joining with all 50 Republicans in voting no. Democratic campaign arms have already signaled that abortion will be a key issue heading into the midterms and will galvanize their base. Republicans are largely convinced that "sanctity of life" issues will spark renewed enthusiasm for conservative candidates in state-level elections.







Article: 6
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Fox News Poll: Two-thirds say abortion pill should be legal
Author: Victoria Balara 
Publication_Date: Published April 27, 2023 6:00pm EDT
Article_Content: Fox News Polling found that 30% of voters believe the abortion medication should be illegal. VP Harris: 'Don't get in our way' on abortion legislation. Vice President Kamala Harris spoke about abortion on Tuesday at Howard University in Washington, D.C. (Pool via APTN) A majority of American voters thinks the FDA-approved prescription medication used to end a pregnancy, mifepristone, should be legal. That’s from the latest Fox News Poll, which measured opinions on the controversial issue, as well as attitudes toward a Supreme Court whose decisions are reshaping public policy on abortion. Approval of the Supreme Court remains near its low, with 41% approving of the job it’s doing. Support for the high court declined to a record 39% in June 2022, after the leak of a draft court opinion on the case deciding Roe v. Wade, but shortly before the ruling that overturned the landmark abortion ruling (June 24, 2022). The court’s approval rating has held between 39-42% since last summer.  Currently, 55% disapprove of the Supreme Court. Fox News Poll on Supreme Court job performance. (Fox News ) The survey, released Thursday, was conducted soon after the April 21 Supreme Court decision that allows full access to mifepristone, commonly known as the abortion pill, while a lawsuit against it makes its way through the lower federal courts.  Sixty-five percent think the abortion pill should be legal – including nearly half of conservatives (46%) and White evangelicals (44%). Plus, more men (68%) than women (63%) support the drug. Overall, 30% of voters believe the abortion medication should be illegal. Fox News Poll on medication abortion. (Fox News) In general, a near-high 56% believe abortion should be legal either all (32%) or most (24%) of the time, while 43% say it should be illegal except in certain circumstances (36%) or always (7%). Support for abortion reached a record 57% last September and has stayed over 50% since last June. By an 8-point margin, voters oppose a law that bans abortion after 6 weeks of pregnancy. That’s a reversal from last May when more favored it by 4 points. Support for a 6-week ban is down across the board, but one of the largest shift is among men, who oppose it by 5 points, while last year they supported it by 13 points. Hispanic voters also flipped their stance, now opposing a 6-week ban by 3 points vs. favoring the law by 17 points a year ago. Republicans are less likely to back the ban now by 7 points. On a 15-week abortion ban, support has held steady: 54% of voters favor it vs. 42% oppose, virtually the same as last year (54-41%). Fox News Poll on abortion bans. (Fox News ) Among Democrats, 28% favor a 6-week ban and 43% favor a 15-week ban, while 84% want mifepristone to be legal. More than 6 in 10 Republicans favor the 6-week (62%) and 15-week bans (67%), and their views split on the abortion-inducing drug (46% legal, 49% illegal). Despite the news coverage abortion has been getting, just 3% offer that abortion is the most important issue facing the country. Conducted April 21-24, 2023, under the joint direction of Beacon Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R), this Fox News Poll includes interviews with 1,004 registered voters nationwide who were randomly selected from a national voter file and spoke with live interviewers on both landlines and cellphones. The total sample has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.







Article: 7
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Federal appeals court restricts access to abortion pill Mifepristone, drug remains available
Author: Adam Sabes , David Spunt
Publication_Date: Published August 16, 2023 6:18pm EDT
Article_Content: The Supreme Court previously issued an injunction, and the abortion pill ruling won't take immediate effect. Supreme Court preserves full access to Mifepristone Former deputy assistant attorney general John Yoo discusses the Supreme Court ruling regarding the abortion pill Mifepristone on 'Fox News @ Night.’A federal court of appeals on Wednesday ruled to keep the abortion pill Mifepristone available but placed restrictions on the drug. The decision came from three judges on the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans on Wednesday, and overturns portions of a previous ruling while leaving others in place. The ruling ends the availability of Mifepristone by mail, requires that it is administered in a physician's presence, and also states that the drug can be used through the seventh week of pregnancy, versus the previous 10 weeks. While the court ruled in favor of the restrictions, they won't take immediate effect as the Supreme Court previously issued an injunction, allowing access to the drug until the case is fully litigated. A box containing a Mifepristone tablet is seen at Blue Mountain Clinic in Missoula, Montana, U.S. February 28, 2023. A U.S. District Court judge in Texas ruled last month against the Food and Drug Administration, stating that the approval process for the abortion drug was improper. Alliance Defending Freedom, which filed the Texas lawsuit against the FDA's approval of Mifepristone, said in a statement that the Wednesday decision is a "victory for women’s health." "The 5th Circuit rightly required the FDA to do its job and restore crucial safeguards for women and girls, including ending illegal mail-order abortions," said ADF Senior Counsel Erin Hawley, vice president of the ADF Center for Life and Regulatory Practice. "The FDA will finally be made to account for the damage it has caused to the health of countless women and girls and the rule of law by unlawfully removing every meaningful safeguard from the chemical abortion drug regimen." FILE - Boxes of the drug mifepristone sit on a shelf at the West Alabama Women's Center in Tuscaloosa, Ala., March 16, 2022. Abortion providers in three states filed a lawsuit Monday, May 8, 2023, aimed at preserving access to the abortion pill mifepristone, even as the drug is threatened by a separate Texas lawsuit winding its way through U.S. court system. Judge Jennifer Walker Elrod wrote in the ruling that "In loosening mifepristone’s safety restrictions, the FDA failed to address several important concerns about whether the drug would be safe for the women who use it." A Department of Justice spokesperson said in a statement that it "strongly disagrees" with the decision and will be seeking a Supreme Court review. Attorneys general in twelve Democratic-led states sued the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, challenging their restrictions on the distribution of mifepristone, an abortion pill, alleging that they aren't supported by evidence. "As the Attorney General has said before, the Justice Department is committed to defending the FDA’s scientific judgment and protecting Americans’ access to safe and effective reproductive care," a DOJ spokesperson said.









Article: 8
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Pro-life Republicans say FDA approval of abortion pill was illegal, ask appeals court to uphold injunction
Author: Chris Pandolfo
Publication_Date: Published April 12, 2023 7:40am EDT
Article_Content: Republican lawmakers urging Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals to uphold injunction against abortion pill mifepristone. HHS Secretary says ignoring federal judge’s abortion pill ruling is ‘on the table’ The HHS secretary also scorched the Texas judge's ruling on the abortion pill as un-American.A group of 69 Republican lawmakers are asking a federal appeals court to uphold the injunction issued by a Texas judge last week that would halt the Food and Drug Administration's more than two-decade old approval of the abortion pill mifepristone. In court documents filed Tuesday, the GOP members of Congress write that they are "committed to protecting women and girls from the harms of the abortion industry." They assert FDA approval of medication abortions, which they call chemical abortions, was "unlawful." "By approving and deregulating chemical abortion drugs, the FDA has not followed Congress' statutorily prescribed drug approval process and has subverted Congress' critical public policy interests in upholding patient welfare," the Republicans argue. "The FDA's lawless actions ultimately endanger women and girls seeking chemical abortions." The brief was led by Sen. Cindy Hyde-Smith, R-Miss., and Rep. August Pfluger, R-Texas. It comes in response to 240 congressional Democrats that asked the 5th Circuit to overturn the injunction. Abortion pills Doses of Mifepristone, the abortion pill, and Misoprostol, which is taken the day after to cause cramping and bleeding to empty the uterus, are pictured at Dr. Franz Theards Womens Reproductive Clinic in Santa Teresa, New Mexico on May 7, 2022.  (Paul Ratje/The Washington Post via Getty Images) Last week, in an unprecedented and highly controversial decision, Trump-appointed U.S. District Judge Matthew J. Kacsmaryk issued an injunction against the FDA's approval of mifepristone, a popular drug used in more than half of all abortions in the U.S. The Biden administration quickly filed an appeal to the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals. Mifepristone, under the brand name Mifeprex, is part of a two-drug regimen that first blocks hormones needed to keep an unborn baby alive and then causes cramps and contractions to expel the dead fetus from the mother's womb. The drug was approved by the FDA in 2000. Since then, medication abortions have grown in popularity and now make up nearly 60% of all abortions in the United States. More than five million women in the United States have used mifepristone to abort their pregnancies, according to the drug's manufacturer. mifepristone pill A Texas judge has halted FDA approval of mifepristone, a drug used to induce abortions. The Department of Justice is appealing the decision.  (Reuters) Democratic lawmakers have issued dire warnings that the Texas judge's decision not only ignores the FDA's expert review process, but also opens the door for other longstanding approved medications to be challenged. In their brief, which was joined by Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., and House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries, D-N.Y., Democrats said Kacsmaryk's decision "has no basis in law." "While Congress permitted some judicial review of FDA's approval decisions, it did not invite federal courts to substitute their judgment for the expert conclusions of FDA's scientists," the Democrats wrote. The brief was joined by 50 senators and 190 House Democrats, who argued an emergency stay is needed on the Texas judge's injunction "to mitigate the imminent harm facing members of the public, many of whom rely on the availability of mifepristone for reproductive care — and many more of whom rely on the integrity of FDA’s drug approval process for continued access to life-improving and lifesaving drugs."  Abortion pill A group of 69 Republicans filed a brief supporting a lawsuit to halt FDA approval of mifepristone, arguing the agency approved the drug unlawfully.  (AP Photo/Jeff Roberson) Republicans argued more harm would come to women and girls if the drug continues to be approved and asked the court to uphold the injunction. "[We] urge the Court to deny the emergency motion for a stay pending appeal, which will allow the District Court’s Section 705 stay to go into effect and protect women and girls from the harms of chemical abortion drugs," they wrote. 








Article: 9
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: DeSantis warns the left will 'weaponize' Trump's remarks on abortion
Author: Danielle Wallace 
Publication_Date: Published September 24, 2023 7:22am EDT
Article_Content: lorida Gov. Ron DeSantis says left will 'weaponize' Trump's abortion comments 'to defeat the cause of life'. Republican 2024 White House hopeful and Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, in a new interview that aired Saturday, warned that the left will attempt to "weaponize" former President Donald Trump’s comments against six-week abortion bans.  During an appearance on The Glenn Beck Podcast, DeSantis warned that a referendum for a constitutional amendment "to basically have abortion on demand" might be on the ballot in Florida. "The left is pursuing it, and if that passes, that means the legislature can never do anything to protect life," DeSantis said. "Do you think they’re going to run ads to Republicans and Independents, showing Trump, Trump voters, saying ‘Trump didn’t like this, vote the other way, for us’? Of course they are. They’re gonna weaponize what he said, to try to defeat the cause of life." DeSantis speaks at Texas oil rig Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis speaks to members of the media and site workers at the Permian Deep Rock Oil Company site during a campaign event on September 20, 2023 in Midland, Texas. DeSantis last week warned pro-life Americans that Trump will "sell you out" on abortion after the former president, in his first network interview since leaving office on NBC "Meet the Press," criticized the Florida governor’s support of a six-week abortion ban as a "terrible mistake." Trump vowed to reach a deal between Republicans and Democrats on the number of weeks into pregnancy where abortion would be illegal, ripping Democrats for allegedly supporting late-term abortions. Trump speaks in Iowa 2024 Republican presidential candidate and former President Donald Trump speaks to guests during a "Commit To Caucus" rally at the Jackson County Fairgrounds on September 20, 2023 in Maquoketa, Iowa.  (Scott Olson/Getty Images) While state law in Florida currently prohibits most abortions after 15 weeks, DeSantis, in April, signed the Heartbeat Protection Act, which aims to restrict abortions after six weeks gestation, with exceptions including women who are victims of rape, incest and human trafficking, or whose baby has a devastating diagnosis of a fatal fetal abnormality. A court ruling this fall could determine whether the law will take effect.  Trump signs a MAGA hat in Iowa 2024 Republican presidential candidate and former U.S. President Donald Trump greets guests following a "Commit To Caucus" rally at the Jackson County Fairgrounds on Sept. 20, 2023, in Maquoketa, Iowa.  (Scott Olson/Getty Images) Trump later attempted to clarify his comment, credited himself for the Supreme Court's overturn of Roe V. Wade, which he says gave pro-life Americans bargaining power. "I was able to do something that nobody thought was possible, end Roe v. Wade," Trump wrote on TRUTH Social. "For 52 years, people talked, spent vast amounts of money, but couldn’t get the job done. I got the job done! Thanks to the three great Supreme Court Justices I appointed, this issue has been returned to the States, where all Legal Scholars, on both sides, felt it should be."









Article: 10
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Newsom refuses to say if he supports any limits on abortion while calling GOP attacks on the issue 'total BS'
Author:  Joseph A. Wulfsohn 
Publication_Date: Published September 19, 2023 8:30pm EDT
Article_Content: CNN's Dana Bash repeatedly pressed the California governor on his own abortion stance. Gavin Newsom calls GOP claims about Dem abortion stance a 'canard' During an interview with CNN, California Gov. Gavin Newsom was repeatedly pressed whether he supported any legal abortion limits while slamming GOP attacks on Democrats as a "canard." California Gov. Gavin Newsom refused to say whether he supported any legal limits on abortion while dismissing GOP claims that Democrats back late-term abortions as a "political canard" Monday. Newsom was asked by CNN anchor Dana Bash to react to former President Trump's recent comments accusing Democrats of supporting abortions right up til the moment of birth and even after. "What does that mean, ‘after birth abortion?'" Newsom scoffed. "It's made up." "Can you just be clear about what limits on abortion should be?" Bash asked. Gavin Newsom on CNN California Gov. Gavin Newsom refused to express support for legal abortion limits during an interview with CNN's Dana Bash. "It's a political thing," Newsom responded. "People are not seeking abortion-" "But what is the policy? What should it be?" Bash pressed. "The policy- it's not up to Donald Trump or me," Newsom replied. "It's up to you, to women that have to bear that responsibility uniquely and distinctively. And the reality is, it's a canard. It's a political frame. It's total BS. And it's exactly where they need to go because they know they've gone too far." The CNN anchor invoked California's own laws, which previously limited abortions at "viability," which is roughly 24 weeks. But as Newsom pointed out, a constitutional amendment was passed last year that says "the state shall not deny or interfere with an individual's reproductive freedom in their most intimate decisions, which includes their fundamental right to choose to have an abortion and their fundamental right to choose or refuse contraceptives." Newsom stressed the constitutional amendment "has some nuance in it" that's being "adjudicated in public opinion." Newsom smirks California Gov. Gavin Newsom speaks  at a news conference in Sacramento, Calif., Thursday, March 16, 2023. On Thursday, March 30, 2023, Newsom announced a new political action committee he says will boost Democrats in Republican-led states. "So there should be nothing on the books?" Bash asked. "This is a canard. This is a false flag. This is where they need to go in order to get out of the mess they created because they don't believe in fundamental choice and freedom for women. They don't. Period. Full stop," Newsom said. "And this whole issue is a political issue… At the end of the day, those examples are so extreme, so rare when you have when you have literally viability issues that are deeply personal and painful… you're forced to make this terrible decision at the end of a term and to exploit that for political purposes offends." "I just want to be clear because people are going to be listening very carefully to what you're saying," Bash followed. "You do not believe it is the role of government nationally or state government to have any limits on the books legally." Gavin Newsom Newsom's name is repeatedly floated among Democrats as a potential replacement for President Biden at the top of the ticket in 2024 though the California governor has repeatedly expressed support for the incumbent. While Newsom claimed he has "long believed in viability," he again stressed the constitutional amendment his state passed has "created some questions as it relates to this." "My point is no one wants to see the late, late-term abortion. No one's out there promoting that. That's not what the Democratic Party's position is. That's not what my personal position is," Newsom said. "In those rare and extremely rare and personal circumstances, one thing I absolutely believe- Donald Trump shouldn't be making that decision. I'm sure as hell shouldn't be making that decision. That's a decision for the mother, the would-be mother and for her doctor and for whoever member of her family or priest believes that's the right thing to do. And beyond that, with all due respect, I call BS on this whole debate. It is purely a political canard."








Article: 11
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Nikki Haley, 2024 Republican candidate, vows to sign federal abortion ban if elected president
Author: Lawrence Richard , Paul Steinhauser 
Publication_Date: Published May 25, 2023 4:48am EDT
Article_Content: Republican frontrunners, including former President Donald Trump and Gov. Ron DeSantis, appear to differ on abortion. Nikki Haley argues Ron DeSantis has 'done a total 180' and is 'copying Trump'
Republican presidential candidate Nikki Haley made her comments in an interview with Fox News Digital, Wednesday, May 24, 2023, at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics in Goffstown, New Hampshire. MANCHESTER. N.H. - Republican presidential candidate and former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley is pledging to sign a federal ban on abortion. But Haley, the former two-term South Carolina governor who served as ambassador to the United Nations during former President Donald Trump's administration, emphasizes that passing such a ban would be highly unlikely without more Republicans in Congress. On Wednesday, as Haley headlined the latest edition of ‘Politics and Eggs' at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics, she committed to banning the procedure, should a bill doing so clear a Republican-controlled Congress. The speaking series at Saint Anselm College is a must stop for White House hopefuls. But Haley did not specify details of a potential national abortion bill and said passage of such legislation through the U.S. Senate would be highly unlikely unless more Republicans are elected. "It would take a majority of the House, 60 senators and a president to sign it," Haley said Wednesday, referencing Republicans’ ability to overcome a potential Democratic filibuster. "We haven’t had 60 Republican senators in 100 years." Nikki Haley Republican presidential candidate Nikki Haley gestures while addressing a breakfast gathering at Saint Anselm College's New Hampshire Institute of Politics, on Wednesday, May 24, 2023, in Manchester, N.H. Answering a question from a student in the audience, Haley described abortion as "incredibly personal" and said her opposition to it would not waver, even if she were to campaign in a more liberal state. "I can’t suddenly change my pro-life position because I’m campaigning in New Hampshire," Haley said. "It’s incredibly personal, and I’m going to treat it with the respect it deserves." The issue of abortion has been front and center of the national conversation after the U.S. Supreme Court last year overturned the landmark Roe v. Wade ruling, returning the combustible issue of legalized abortion to the states. "Now it’s back in the states where it belongs," Haley emphasized. Republican controlled states have differed on abortion bans, with some lawmakers pushing for total bans, and some drawing the lines at six weeks or 15 weeks. Most bills allow exceptions in the case of rape, incest, or to protect the life of the mother. While serving as governor of South Carolina, Haley signed an abortion ban after 20 weeks. Haley with supporter. Republican presidential candidate Nikki Haley passes an autographed wooden egg to a guest during a breakfast gathering at Saint Anselm College, Wednesday, May 24, 2023, in Manchester, N.H. Earlier this week, the South Carolina Senate passed a new ban on abortion after a fetal heartbeat is detected, which is usually around six weeks of pregnancy. Republican Gov. Henry McMaster, who succeed Haley, has said he will sign it into law. The bill is already facing legal challenges. Asked in an interview with Fox News Digital if she would put her signature on the measure if she were still South Carolina governor, Haley answered "I would sign whatever bill is consensus. And if that’s what the people of South Carolina want, I would always do whatever the people of South Carolina wanted." Several Republican presidential candidates have already said they would support similar bans. South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott, who launched his presidential campaign on Monday, told Fox News recently that he would sign a 15-week ban into law. Republican front-runners, including former President Donald Trump and Gov. Ron DeSantis, appear to differ on the issue. DeSantis, who launched his campaign Wednesday, recently signed a six-week ban in Florida. DeSantis waving Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis launched his presidential bid on Wednesday, May 24, 2023. Trump, who launched his presidential campaign last year, implied such a ban was "too harsh," although he has publicly expressed he is pro-life. Former Vice President Mike Pence, who is expected to announce a bid for the presidency, has expressed support for Florida’s bill and would sign a similar proposal into law.





Article: 12
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Nebraska woman who helped burn, conceal daughter's abortion gets 2-year prison sentence
Author: Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published September 22, 2023 4:05pm EDT
Article_Content: Jessica Burgess pleaded guilty in July to tampering with human remains, false reporting, providing abortion past 20 weeks. A Nebraska mother who pleaded guilty to giving her teenage daughter pills for an abortion and helping to burn and conceal the fetus was sentenced Friday to two years in prison. Jessica Burgess, 42, pleaded guilty in July to tampering with human remains, false reporting and providing an abortion after at least 20 weeks of gestation, which is illegal in Nebraska. Madison County District Judge Mark Johnson sentenced her Friday to one year in prison for each count, with the first two to run concurrently. The sentence for the abortion count was ordered to run after the first two, amounting to a two-year sentence. Online court records show the judge deemed her unsuitable for probation. Burgess, of Norfolk, Nebraska, admitted at her plea hearing to helping her then-17-year-old daughter end her pregnancy. As part of her plea, charges of concealing the death of another person and abortion by someone other than a licensed physician were dismissed. Her daughter, Celeste Burgess, who is now 19, was sentenced in July to 90 days in jail and two years of probation for burning and burying the fetus. Omaha, Lincoln, Nebraska city crime Jessica Burgess of Nebraska has been sentenced to two years in prison for helping her daughter conceal an illegal abortion and desecrate the discarded fetus. (Fox News) The abortion, well into the teen's third trimester, violated Nebraska law at the time that banned abortion after 20 weeks of gestation. Officials have said Jessica Burgess ordered abortion pills online and gave them to her daughter in the spring of 2022. Norfolk police opened an investigation into the abortion following a tip, according to an arrest affidavit. Police secured a search warrant to gain access to Facebook messages between the two, where prosecutors say the women discussed terminating the pregnancy and destroying the evidence. Police then found the burned fetal remains buried in a field north of Norfolk. In one of the Facebook messages, Jessica Burgess instructed her daughter on how to take the pills to end the pregnancy, according to court records. In another, Celeste Burgess wrote, "I will finally be able to wear jeans." During the legislative session that ended in June, Nebraska lawmakers who opposed Republicans' efforts to severely restrict abortion access repeatedly cited the Norfolk case, saying it shows state prosecutors would target women who seek abortions for criminal prosecution. Republicans in the officially nonpartisan Nebraska Legislature failed this year to enact a six-week ban on abortions, but later passed a 12-week ban after adding it as an amendment to another bill limiting gender-affirming care for transgender youth. The American Civil Liberties Union has sued to overturn the abortion ban and transgender care bill, citing a Nebraska constitutional requirement that legislative bills stick to a single subject. Both the legislative action and the sentencings in the Norfolk case came in the wake of the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision last year to overturn Roe v. Wade, which for 50 years had established a constitutional right to abortion.



Article: 13
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Texas judge rules state's abortion law is too restrictive for women with pregnancy complications
Author: Landon Mion 
Publication_Date: Published August 5, 2023 4:21am EDT
Article_Content: The injunction was immediately blocked by an appeal to the Texas Supreme Court, the state attorney general's office said. A Texas judge ruled Friday that the abortion ban in the Lone Star State has shown to be too restrictive for women with serious pregnancy complications and that the law must allow exceptions in which doctors would not be concerned about criminal charges. The ruling by State District Judge Jessica Mangrum is the first to put a dent in Texas' abortion law since it took effect last year following the Supreme Court's decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, which allowed states to make their own laws regarding abortions. And supporters of abortion access view the Texas case as a potential model to weaken restrictions in other Republican-led states with abortion bans. The challenge is also believed to be the first in the country brought by women who have been denied abortions since the Supreme Court's decision. But the injunction was immediately blocked by an appeal to the Texas Supreme Court, according to the state attorney general's office. Abortion protest A Texas judge ruled Friday that the state's abortion ban has shown to be too restrictive for women with serious pregnancy complications."The trial court's injunction is ineffective, and the status quo remains in effect," spokesperson Paige Willey said. Mangrum's ruling granted a temporary injunction preventing Texas from enforcing the ban against physicians who use "good faith judgment" to terminate a pregnancy that creates a risk of infection or is otherwise unsafe for the woman to continue because of complications. The injunction also applies to women who have a condition "exacerbated by pregnancy" and cannot be effectively treated during their pregnancy. Additionally, the ruling covers instances where the fetus has a condition that makes it unlikely to survive after birth. "For the first time in a long time, I cried for joy when I heard the news," lead plaintiff Amanda Zurawski said in a statement. "This is exactly why we did this. This is why we put ourselves through the pain and the trauma over and over again to share our experiences and the harms caused by these awful laws." Amanda Zurawski, Samantha Casiano and Molly Duane Amanda Zurawski (left), who developed sepsis and nearly died after being refused an abortion when her water broke at 18 weeks and Samantha Casiano (center), who was forced to carry a nonviable pregnancy to term and give birth to a baby who died four hours after birth, stand with their attorney Molly Duane outside the Travis County Courthouse. Mangrum said the injunction would stay in place until the case is completed. A trial for the case is scheduled to begin on March 25. According to a statement from First Assistant Attorney General Brent Webster, however, the state's immediate appeal "stays an activist Austin judge's attempt to override Texas abortion laws pending a ruling by the Texas Supreme Court." The immediate impact of Friday's ruling is also unclear after all abortion clinics in the state have closed in the past year. The judge found that portions of the abortion law violated the rights of pregnant women under the Texas Constitution. Pro-choice advocates stand outside with signs, one sign saying "Keep Abortion Legal" The injunction was immediately blocked by an appeal to the Texas Supreme Court, according to the state attorney general's office. The women challenging the law were determined to have each experienced "emergent medical conditions" during pregnancy that put their health or lives at risk and "required abortion care." They were delayed or denied abortion access because of uncertainty about the possibility of physicians facing criminal charges for providing abortions, the ruling said. "Today’s ruling should prevent other Texans from suffering the unthinkable trauma our plaintiffs endured," said Nancy Northup, president and CEO of the Center for Reproductive Rights, which helped bring the lawsuit. Under Texas' law, doctors who perform abortions could face life in prison and fines of up to $100,000.






Article: 14
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: The Satanic Temple opens clinic to provide 'religious abortion' care named for Justice Samuel Alito's mother
Author:  Chris Pandolfo
Publication_Date: Published February 1, 2023 10:22am EST
Article_Content: New TST Health facility in New Mexico will be called 'The Samuel Alito's Mom's Satanic Abortion Clinic' The Satanic Temple is opening a health clinic in New Mexico to provide "free religious medication abortion" and will name the facility "The Samuel Alito’s Mom’s Satanic Abortion Clinic" in mockery of Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito, who authored the opinion overturning Roe v. Wade. TST Health, the new medical services arm of the nontheistic religious organization, will provide telehealth screenings and appointments to provide abortion pills to patients. These services will be provided free of charge as part of The Satanic Temple's "abortion ritual," though patients must still pay for the medications from a pharmacy, which typically cost around $90, according to the TST Health website. The New Mexico facility will be operated by licensed medical staff and will make its services available to state residents who are at least 17 years old, up to 11 weeks pregnant and medically eligible for an abortion. The facility was named for Justice Alito's mother because Alito wrote the majority opinion in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, which overturned Roe v. Wade and held that the Constitution of the United States does not confer a right to abortion. The Satanic Temple Health website TST Health is a new medical arm of The Satanic Temple that provides "free religious telehealth medication abortion care." Associate Justice Samuel Alito Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito. "In 1950, Samuel Alito’s mother did not have options, and look what happened," said Malcolm Jarry, a co-founder of The Satanic Temple. "Prior to 1973, doctors who performed abortions could lose their licenses and go to jail. The clinic’s name serves to remind people just how important it is to have the right to control one’s body and the potential ramifications of losing that right." The Satanic Temple was co-founded by Jarry and Lucien Graves a decade ago to be a Satanic faith-based organization that would meet the requirements to receive government benefits and privileges as a religious organization, but without belief in a deity. Its stated mission is to "encourage benevolence and empathy, reject tyrannical authority, advocate practical common sense, oppose injustice, and undertake noble pursuits."  Baphomet/Satanic Temple. The Baphomet statue is seen in the conversion room at the Satanic Temple in Salem, Massachusetts, on Oct. 8, 2019. The group claims bodily autonomy and "the freedom to offend" as sacrosanct in its fundamental tenets. It has sparked outrage nationwide by starting after-school Satan clubs, installing statues of Baphomet in public holiday displays, and challenging state abortion bans by claiming its "abortion ritual" is an essential religious practice protected under state Religious Freedom Restoration Acts. The Satanic Temple said it hopes to expand its abortion operations into other states as part of its campaign to claim abortion as a religious sacrament protected under the First Amendment and federal law. "TST is proud to expand reproductive options for our members. This is just the beginning," said Erin Helian, executive director of campaigns. "We will remain steadfast as we continue the fight to uphold reproductive justice in the United States." 




Article: 15
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Biden administration asks Supreme Court to take up major abortion pill case
Author:  Chris Pandolfo
Publication_Date: Published September 9, 2023 6:53am EDT
Article_Content: DOJ lawyers said mifepristone is the 'best method' for terminating an early pregnancy and said limits on access to the drug harm women All-Star Panel: What is the impact of the Supreme Court's decision on abortion pill? 'Special Report' All-Star Panel reacts to the Supreme Court blocking restrictions on access to mifepristone and the latest in the Hunter Biden investigation. The Biden administration on Friday asked the Supreme Court to review a lower court opinion that made the abortion pill available but placed restrictions on the drug's distribution. In a cert petition, the Justice Department argued the loss of access to mifepristone, the abortion drug, would be "damaging for women and healthcare providers around the Nation." The government called mifepristone the "best method" to terminate early pregnancies and pointed to the Food and Drug Administration's previous determination that the drug is safe and effective. "The effect of the lower court's decisions would be to compel FDA to return to a pre-2016 regulatory regime that imposes restrictions on distribution that FDA has found to be unnecessary and unjustified," lawyers for the Justice Department wrote. The filing came hours after abortion pill manufacturer Danco Laboratories filed its own petition seeking Supreme Court review of the lower court ruling. Abortion pills Boxes of the drug mifepristone sit on a shelf at the West Alabama Women's Center in Tuscaloosa, Ala., March 16, 2022. The Justice Department on Friday asked the Supreme Court to review a 5th Circuit decision that rolled back deregulation on the distribution of mifepristone. Last month, a three-judge panel on the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans rolled back FDA deregulation of the abortion pill. The ruling ended the availability of Mifepristone by mail, required that it is administered in a physician's presence, and also stated that the drug can only be used through the seventh week of pregnancy, versus the previous 10 weeks. Judge Jennifer Walker Elrod wrote in the ruling that "In loosening mifepristone’s safety restrictions, the FDA failed to address several important concerns about whether the drug would be safe for the women who use it." Abortion clinic A patient prepares to take the first of two combination pills, mifepristone, for a medication abortion during a visit to a clinic in Kansas City, Kan., on Wednesday, Oct. 12, 2022. DOJ called mifepristone the "best method" to terminate an early pregnancy and said restricting access to the pill will harm women. The Justice Department called it an "unprecedented" decision that contradicted the FDA's expert judgment. However, the Supreme Court previously issued an injunction temporarily keeping the Biden administration's deregulated rules in place while the case proceeds through court. Mifepristone currently remains available in states where abortion is legal under the FDA-approved conditions. The Supreme Court previously placed an injunction that maintained access to mifepristone while a lawsuit challenging the drug's approval proceeds through court.  (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite, File) Mifepristone, known by the brand name Mifeprex, is a pill taken with misoprostol in a two-drug regimen that first deprives an unborn baby of hormones it needs to stay alive and then causes cramps and contractions to expel the dead fetus from the mother's womb. According to Danco, more than 5 million women have used Mifeprex in the United States since the FDA approved its use in 2000. The drug is 97% effective in terminating early pregnancy, although the company says 3% of women who take it will require surgical intervention for ongoing pregnancy, heavy bleeding, incomplete expulsion or other reasons such as patient request. "The FDA actions at issue were well supported by extensive safety and effectiveness data from clinical trials and decades worth of real-world experience in millions of patients," Danco said in a news release. "The changes in 2016 and 2021—approved by FDA after careful analysis — have expanded the availability and use of Mifeprex®, providing crucial individual and public health benefits." Alliance Defending Freedom, which filed the Texas lawsuit against the FDA's approval of Mifepristone, previously said the 5th Circuit decision was a "victory for women's health." "The 5th Circuit rightly required the FDA to do its job and restore crucial safeguards for women and girls, including ending illegal mail-order abortions," said ADF Senior Counsel Erin Hawley, vice president of the ADF Center for Life and Regulatory Practice. "The FDA will finally be made to account for the damage it has caused to the health of countless women and girls and the rule of law by unlawfully removing every meaningful safeguard from the chemical abortion drug regimen."







Article: 16
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Haley searches for common ground on combustible issue of abortion 'to save as many babies as we can'
Author: Paul Steinhauser 
Publication_Date: Published September 16, 2023 4:31pm EDT
Article_Content: Nikki Haley rolls into Iowa riding a wave of post-debate momentum; says voters are 'paying attention'Nikki Haley searches for common ground on combustible issue of abortion 'to save as many babies as we can' Former ambassador and former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley, a 2024 Republican presidential candidate, searches for common ground on the combustible issue of abortion WEST DES MOINES, Iowa – When it comes to the combustible issue of abortion, Republican presidential candidate Nikki Haley appears to be on a mission. "We are not going to demonize this issue anymore. We’re going to humanize it because it’s too personal of an issue," the former ambassador and former two-term South Carolina governor said Saturday in a Fox News Digital interview minutes before she headlined a town hall in the suburbs of Iowa's capitol city.That line echoes Haley's statements on the issue from last month. "We need to stop demonizing this issue," Haley said in August at the first Republican debate, a Fox News hosted showdown last month in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. "It’s personal for every woman and man." Nikki Haley speaking Nikki Haley speaks during the Republican presidential primary debate on August 23, 2023 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin (Fox News) The blockbuster move last year by the Supreme Court’s conservative majority to overturn the landmark nearly half-century-old Roe v. Wade ruling, which had allowed for legalized abortions nationwide, moved the divisive issue back to the states. And it's forced Republicans to play plenty of defense in elections across the country, as a party that's nearly entirely "pro-life" has had to deal with an electorate where a majority of Americans support at least some form of abortion access. Haley, as she faces off against a dozen rivals for the 2024 Republican presidential nomination, is pushing a message that she hope will resonate both with the GOP's anti-abortion base as well as moderate Republicans and swing voters who support some degree of legalized abortion. She's also been critical — as witnessed in the first debate — of some of her rivals who are heavily advocating for a 15-week federal abortion ban."Our goal is to save as many babies as we can. Support as many moms as we can. That’s the goal. So in order to do that, we have to have 60 Senate votes. Let’s see where that is but we only have 45 pro-life senators," Haley said on Saturday. "So let’s focus on what we do agree on," she said. "Let’s ban late-term abortions. Let’s encourage adoptions. Let’s make sure contraceptives accessible. Let’s make sure that nurses and doctors who don’t believe abortion don’t have to perform them. And let’s make sure no state law requires a women to go to jail or get the death penalty for abortion. We’re talking about hard truths and women around the country agree with me." Haley searches for common ground on combustible issue of abortion: 'Our goal is to save as many babies as we can' Former ambassador and former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley, a 2024 Republican presidential candidate, speaks at a town hall at Jethros BBQ, on Sept. 16, 2023 in West Des Moines, Iowa (Fox News - Paul Steinhauser) Haley was interviewed at Jethro's BBQ, a popular eatery with multiple locations in Iowa, the state whose caucuses kick off the GOP presidential nominating calendar. And she spoke hours before she and most of the rest of the field of Republican presidential candidates attend the Iowa Faith and Freedom Coalition's annual fall banquet, as the contenders each make their case to a large and influential crowd of social conservative leaders, activists, and Evangelical voters, who play an outsized role in Hawkeye State Republican politics. Nicole Schlinger, a longtime Republican strategist in Iowa who's well-connected to the social conservative community, said that former President Donald Trump's "track record on issues concerning life is extremely good," and that "it’s not surprising that there hasn’t been much change" when it comes to his large double-digit lead in the Iowa polls. Trump remains the commanding front-runner in the latest polls in Iowa, the other early voting states, and especially in national surveys, as he runs a third striaght time for the White House. But Schlinger added "I think there’s a path open for another candidate or two to perform well and exceed expectations in Iowa… The door’s open but someone needs to walk through it and that hasn’t happened yet." Pointing to Haley, she said "I think she has a great story to tell but she needs to clarify more what she said on that debate stage" regarding abortion. Haley has enjoyed plenty of polling and fundraising momentum since her well-regarded performance in the first Republican presidential primary debate. And in her first trip back to Iowa sine the debate showdown, she drew healthy crowds Friday at a couple of agriculture-themed events in eastern Iowa and a large crowd Saturday morning to her town hall in suburban Des Moines. Nikki Haley rolls into Iowa riding a wave of post-debate momentum; says voters are 'paying attention'Video. "We’ve seen hundreds of people come out. We love it. Iowa’s ready. They’re paying attention," Haley spotlighted. "Momentum from the debate but they also like what we have to say and I’ve said for a long time – we have a country to save and I’m determined to do it and it all starts here in Iowa." Haley emphasized that "people are excited. They want something different. They want a new generational leader. They want to leave the chaos of the past and they want go forward and they’re tired of the fact that they just don’t feel like anyone’s listening. What we tell them is not only do we hear you, but we’re ready to get to work for you and I think that’s what the people of Iowa and that what the people around the country want." The GOP presidential candidates converge on Iowa with four months until caucuses Former ambassador and former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley, a 2024 Republican presidential candidate, holds a agriculture policy community discussion, on Sept. 15, 2023 in Ground Mound, Iowa.  (Fox News - Deirdre Heavey) It's expected for Haley to tout her momentum. But two well known GOP strategist in Iowa who are neutral in the 2024 nomination battle are also pointing to her upward trajectory. "I think Ambassador Haley did herself a lot of favor. I think she’s in a really good spot," longtime Iowa based Republican strategist and communicator Jimmy Centers said, as he pointed towards the first debate. And David Kochel, a longtime Republican consultant and veteran of numerous GOP presidential campaigns in Iowa and nationally, said that "Nikki got the best bounce out of the debate. I’ve seen it in our internal data." "Maybe she’s in a dead heat with [Florida Gov. Ron] DeSantis," Kochel said, before adding that "it’s still 25 points behind Trump."






Article: 17
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Texas abortion ban challenged as oral arguments begin
Author: Reuters
Publication_Date: Published November 28, 2023 9:32am EST
Article_Content: TX protesters argue that the ban's lack of clarity leads doctors to refuse needed abortions, fearing legal consequences Supreme Court hears argument on Texas abortion law Former U.S. attorney Harry Litman and president of the Judicial Crisis Network Carrie Severino discuss the Constitutional implications of the abortion law on 'Fox News @ Night' A group of patients and doctors will urge Texas' highest court on Tuesday to stop the state from enforcing its near-total abortion ban for women with medical conditions that threaten their health, saying it puts lives at risk. A lower court judge had blocked enforcement of the ban in certain situations on Aug. 4, but the order has been on hold while the state appeals to the Texas Supreme Court. Oral arguments in the case are set for 10 a.m. in Austin. Judge Jessica Mangrum of the Travis County, Texas District Court had ruled that the state could not prosecute doctors for performing abortions under a range of circumstances, including when a pregnancy poses a health risk, exacerbates a health condition or when the fetus is not likely to survive after birth. Texas Capitol building dome with the Texas flag waving in front. The Texas state Capitol is seen in Austin, Texas. Patients and doctors are challenging the state's near-total abortion ban, claiming it jeopardizes women's lives. The state has argued in court papers that the plaintiffs have not shown that they will be harmed in the future by the abortion ban, which includes an exception to save the mother's life. "All we are asking for is common-sense guidance that will allow doctors to use their good faith judgment without fearing loss of their license and life in prison," Molly Duane of the Center for Reproductive Rights, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, said in a statement. The lawsuit, filed in March by five women and two doctors, sought a court order ensuring that doctors cannot be prosecuted for providing abortions if in their good faith judgment the procedure is necessary to treat emergencies that threaten a patient's life or health. An additional 15 women later joined the case. They said the ban's lack of clarity about under what circumstances abortion is allowable was leading doctors to refuse to perform abortions even when exceptions should apply, for fear of losing their licenses and facing up to 99 years in prison. One of the plaintiffs, Amanda Zurawski, said she was hospitalized in Texas with a premature rupture of membranes at 18 weeks of pregnancy, meaning her fetus could not be saved. She was told she could not have an abortion until fetal cardiac activity stopped or her condition became life-threatening. Zurawski said she developed sepsis within days, which required intensive care and allowed the hospital to induce labor. Other plaintiffs said they were forced to travel out of state for medically necessary abortions.



Article: 18
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Kamala Harris stumbles on question about abortion limits: 'She doesn't answer'
Author: Lindsay Kornick  
Publication_Date: Published September 11, 2023 7:50am EDT
Article_Content: Democrats have been accused of supporting abortions up until the moment of birth Kamala Harris dodges question on abortion limits Vice President Kamala Harris repeatedly refused to answer at what week abortions should be limited during an interview on CBS "Face the Nation" on Sunday. Social media users were frustrated with Vice President Kamala Harris after she refused to answer when she believed there should be limits on abortion during an interview on Sunday. Speaking with "Face the Nation" moderator Margaret Brennan, Harris was asked about her thoughts on a federal law to codify abortion rights. While the vice president insisted a majority of Americans were in support, she was less emphatic about limits. "What is it that you believe? I mean, what week of pregnancy should abortion access be cut off?" Brennan asked. "We need to restore the protections of Roe v. Wade," Harris began. "We're not trying to do something new—" Kamala Harris on CBS "Fact the Nation" Vice President Kamala Harris appeared on CBS "Face the Nation." (CBS)
Brennan interrupted, "Well, that was nebulous, because it was about viability, which could be anywhere between 20 to 24 weeks—" "No, no, no, no, no. Let me be very clear," Harris pushed back. "That's, that was in the Women's Health Protection Act that the White House also endorsed—" Brennan explained. Harris concluded, "Let me be very clear. From day one, the president has been clear, I have been clear. We need to put back the protections that are in Roe v. Wade into law. Since the Supreme Court took it, Congress has the power and ability to pass legislation to put those protections back in law and Joe Biden will sign that bill. So, that is what we want." California prop 1 Democrats have been questioned about when there should be limits on abortions. Harris’ efforts were noticed by X users who questioned why she refused to give a definitive answer. "Harris is directly asked at what point does she support abortion, up until what week of pregnancy. She doesn't answer," The Spectator contributing editor Stephen Miller remarked. "She aligns with Virginia’s extremist progressive candidates — 40 weeks," Glenn Youngkin deputy communications director Rob Damschen concluded. Former Maryland Lt. Governor candidate Gordana Schifanelli wrote, "For some bizarre reason Kamala Harris is repeating herself 5 times and not answering the question. And no, my state a Maryland does not have any ‘cut off’ date for abortion." The Post Millennial editor-in-chief Libby Emmons asked, "So.... when does she support abortion up until?" "’We need to restore Roe’ literally just means abortion with zero restrictions/limits. Kamala knows it, you know it, we all know it," former Ohio GOP employee Lizzie Marbach argued. Brennan continually asked, noting that Republicans have accused Democrats of supporting abortion up until the moment of birth. Though Harris called the accusation "ridiculous" and a "mischaracterization of the point," she repeatedly avoided conceding when there should be limits on abortions. Vice President Kamala Harris Vice President Kamala Harris has supported federal legislation that would legalize abortion up until the moment of birth."But does it need to be specific in terms of defining where that guarantee goes up to and where it does not, at which week of pregnancy?" Brennan asked. "We need to put back in place the protections of Roe v. Wade," Harris said. Later on, Brennan pressed harder, asking whether she needed "to be more precise" regarding abortion rights. "I am being precise," Harris insisted. "We need to put into law the protections of Roe v. Wade. And that is about going back to where we were before the Dobbs decision."GOP presidential hopeful Nikki Haley may have been pleased at the line of questioning. At the first Republican primary debate last month, she challenged the media specifically to nail down the Biden-Harris position on what limits, if any, they supported on abortion.



Article: 19
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: US Catholic bishops reaffirm ending abortion as ‘pre-eminent priority’
Author:  Timothy H.J. Nerozzi 
Publication_Date: Published November 16, 2023 10:45am EST
Article_Content: Other threats to human life and dignity include 'euthanasia, gun violence, terrorism, the death penalty and human trafficking,' the bishops write The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB) reaffirmed this week that ending abortion remains the "pre-eminent priority" of the nation's Catholic Church. Attending bishops voted 225-11 in favor of approving a revised edition of the spiritual manual "Forming Consciences for Faithful Citizenship," which addresses abortion early in its text. "The threat of abortion remains our pre-eminent priority because it directly attacks our most vulnerable and voiceless brothers and sisters and destroys more than a million lives per year in our country alone," the introduction to the guide states. US Conference of Catholic Bishops The nation’s Catholic bishops gather for their annual fall meeting at the Marriott Waterfront hotel in Baltimore. The Catholic leaders called for peace in a war-torn world and unity amid strife within their own clerical ranks. USCCB Vice President Archbishop William Lori of Baltimore spoke in favor of the language used in the document at a press conference following the vote, saying that "not all issues are equal." "We are called to stand in radical solidarity with women in difficult pregnancies and their unborn children and to provide them with the kind of support and services and public policies that they need," said Lori. "So, it's not simply a public policy issue. It is a deeply, deeply pastoral issue of loving the moms in need, walking with them, helping them bring their babies to term, and then providing them with what they need to move forward." The manual's introduction also outlines other "grave threats to the life and dignity of the human person," including "euthanasia, gun violence, terrorism, the death penalty, and human trafficking." The bishops also called attention to other, less explicitly violent social issues that they say pose a grave threat to the future of the country — including gender ideology, immigration and the healthcare crisis. "There is also the redefinition of marriage and gender, threats to religious freedom at home and abroad, lack of justice for the poor, the suffering of migrants and refugees, wars and famines around the world, racism, the need for greater access to healthcare and education, care for our common home, and more," the bishops wrote. "All threaten the dignity of the human person." The USCCB typically avoids policy prescriptions when possible and instead seeks to define issues of spiritual importance and offer theological insight for the laity. USCCB opening session An opening session during the annual U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops in Baltimore. The conference of bishops usually avoids explicit endorsements or support for one political group over the other, instead urging Catholics to vote wisely based on platforms and ethics. "The bishops have the responsibility to govern the society of the Church, hand on doctrine and tradition, and administer the sacraments. The laity are called to bring the gospel to bear on the world," the revised document from the USCCB states.  The text continues, "While many laity are involved in roles of leadership and service within the Church, it remains primarily the role of the laity to advocate for justice, to serve in public office, and to inform daily life with the gospel."





Article: 20
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Tuberville not budging on military holds over abortion policy as Dems eye rules change 
Author:  Jamie Joseph
Publication_Date: Published October 31, 2023 4:00am EDT
Article_Content: 

GOP senator tells Fox News Digital he won't back down from protest against Pentagon abortion policy Biden admin has 'extreme' abortion policy: senator Sen. Tommy Tuberville, R-Ala., explains why he continues to block the Biden administration's military nominees from being confirmed on "The Ingraham Angle." FIRST ON FOX: Sen. Tommy Tuberville, R-Ala., has no plans to concede his protest against the Department of Defense (DOD) funding some costs for abortion procedures for military service members, even as Senate Democrats plan to advance a proposal to change the rules this week. Democrats, some Republicans and Kyrsten Sinema, I-Ariz., plan to maneuver around Tuberville's hold on military promotions by introducing a change in the Senate Rules Committee that would allow them to approve a batch of nominees through 2024. Tuberville said the "only power" senators have is "through holes" by trying to change the procedures. It would take nine Republicans to vote with Senate Democrats for a resolution bypassing the holds to pass. It would first go through the rules committee. "I'm trying to keep the White House from playing dictator along with the Pentagon," Tuberville told Fox News Digital. "Abortion is the No. 1 issue in our country in our lifetime when it comes to social issues, and the American people need to have a say so now." Senator Tommy Tuberville at Senate HELP Committee hearing Sen. Tommy Tuberville, a Republican from Alabama, is shown during a Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee hearing in Washington, D.C., on March 22, 2023. The DOD's abortion policy was implemented after the overturning of Roe v. Wade last year. Hundreds of promotion nominees remain in limbo as Tuberville's nearly nine-months-long hold continues in protest of the Pentagon's abortion policy, which allots paid leave and travel costs for service members who seek an abortion. He confirmed that he has no plans to lift the blockade unless it's punted in a floor vote. "And then whichever way it goes, you know, that's life, but that's the only way that I will drop my hold," he said. "They're not going to press me any other way." After talking to several generals and leaders in the military, there's no issue with "military readiness" as some might suggest, Tuberville added. "I know there's some people [who] probably need promotions, and it means a little bit more money," he said. "But at the end of the day, I've talked to a lot of generals and admirals, and they've all said, ‘Listen, the job is getting done.’" Republican Alabama Sen. Tommy Tuberville Sen. Tommy Tuberville, R-Ala., arrives for a Senate Armed Services Committee confirmation hearing on July 26, 2023. Despite efforts to overturn the current hold, Tuberville, a retired college football coach, said he doesn't think a rule change will happen. It would need 60 votes to pass. Republicans currently hold 49 seats in the Senate while Democrats hold the majority at 51. "I think that we'll be able to hold her in the line and force them to eventually vote on this," he said. "We're not the House," he added. "The House is a simple majority. Over here, you've got to get 60 votes. That means you got to have people from the other side convinced that this is what you need to do. That's the reason we're different."







Article: 21
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Ohio voters approve amendment enshrining abortion access into state constitution
Author: Andrew Mark Miller 
Publication_Date: Published November 7, 2023 9:03pm EST  Updated November 7, 2023 9:18pm EST
Article_Content: Trump carried Ohio by 8 points in 2020 Ohio gov says abortion ballot issue goes much too far: Radical proposal Ohio Governor Mike DeWine joins Fox News Sunday to discuss the abortion issue on the ballot, responding to Illinois Gov. J.B Pritzkers accusations over abortion rights and the influx of outside money into the state. Ohio voters have approved a constitutional amendment, according to an Associated Press race call, enshrining abortion rights into the state's constitution in a vote that was opposed by Republicans in the state who argued the measure went even farther than Roe v. Wade. The election signals a major victory for pro-abortion advocates, including the ACLU, who had pumped tens of millions into the state that Trump carried by 8 points in 2020 arguing that a constitutional amendment was needed to protect abortion access after the Supreme Court's reversal of Roe v. Wade. Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights spokesperson Lauren Blauvelt said in an ACLU press release last month that the opponents of Issue 1 were the "extremists" who are "trying to take away our rights and mislead voters." Ohio pro abortion rally An activist seen holding a placard that says protect safe, legal abortion during the protest. "Voting NO hands your most personal family decisions over to the GOVERNMENT," Blauvelt said. Top Republicans in the state, along with parental rights groups and faith leaders, argued that the measure went "too far" and in many cases even farther than Roe v. Wade did.  "It's pretty clear that this constitutional amendment just goes farther, much further than what the average Ohioan approves," Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine told Fox News Digital last month.  "If a voter is comfortable with abortion up until the time of birth, they're probably going to be okay with this amendment — if they're comfortable with parents not being involved in the most important decision their daughter will ever make or certainly has made up until that point in her life. If they're okay with that, then they should vote for this," DeWine added.  Ohio State Issue 1 An attendee holds a rosary as she prays during a "rosary rally" on Sunday, Aug. 6, 2023, in Norwood, Ohio "The ACLU paid out-of-state signature collectors to lie to Ohioans about their dangerous amendment that will strip parents of their rights, permit minors to undergo sex change operations without their parents’ knowledge or consent, and allow painful abortion on demand through all nine months," PWO spokesperson Amy Natoce said. Mini Timmaraju, president and CEO of Reproductive Freedom for All, said before the election that Ohio offers a vital proving ground heading into next year’s presidential election, when Democrats hope the abortion issue can energize supporters in contests up and down the ballot. Abortion-related initiatives could be on the ballot across the country, including in the presidential swing states of Arizona, Nevada and Pennsylvania. Ohio abortion vote Claire Schmitt, an employee of the anti-abortion organization Protect Women Ohio, walks on November 3, 2023 in Westerville, Ohio.  "When we’re able to see how our messaging impacts independents and Republicans and persuades them that this fundamental freedom is important to protect in Ohio, that’s going to be something that we can implement looking at 2024," she said.






Article: 22
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Democrat states begin protecting doctors who send abortion pills to states where they're restricted
Author:  Patrick Hauf
Publication_Date: Published July 20, 2023 12:37pm EDT
Article_Content: FDA previously said the group illegally sends 'misbranded and unapproved new drugs' Cori Bush: Abortion is no different than Tylenol Progressive Democrat Cori Bush claimed that 'tranks folks' need abortions to deal with systemic oppression. Five Democrat-led states have begun to protect U.S. doctors who are sending abortion pills from an unregulated European company to U.S. states that have tried to outlaw those pills. "Shield laws" passed in New York, Massachusetts, Washington, Vermont and Colorado over the past year provide legal protection to abortion providers who send abortion pills to Republican-led states where they are banned. Aid Access, an Austrian nonprofit, announced last week that under this system, its abortion pills were prescribed by U.S. providers and sent to 3,500 women in states where abortion is banned. The group had previously used European doctors to prescribe abortion pills to American women with limited abortion access, but began in mid-June to use American doctors thanks to the "shield laws." The Washington Post spoke with a New York doctor who works with Aid Access to send abortion pills from blue states to red ones. The Post wrote the doctor's family pingpong table was "covered with abortion pills bound for the South and Midwest." Abortion pills Boxes of the abortion drug mifepristone sit on a shelf at the West Alabama Women's Center in Tuscaloosa, March 16, 2022. "Everything I’m doing is completely legal," claimed the doctor, who remained anonymous over safety concerns. "Texas might say I’m breaking their laws, but I don’t live in Texas." Aid Access was founded in 2018 to expand abortion pill access worldwide, regardless of the drug’s legal status. The group announced last week that it now provides access to abortion pills in all 50 U.S. states. The FDA sent Aid Access a cease-and-desist letter in 2019, saying it "determined that you cause the introduction into interstate commerce of misbranded and unapproved new drugs" in violation of federal law. Aid Access responded with a lawsuit, and no further action was taken by the FDA. Abortion protesters Abortion rights advocates gather in front of the J Marvin Jones Federal Building in Amarillo, Texas, on March 15, 2023. (Moises Avila/AFP via Getty Images) Neither the FDA nor Aid Access immediately responded to a request for comment. Abortion pills accounted for the majority of abortions for the first time in 2020, according to the Guttmacher Institute, whose data does not include the unregulated abortion pill market provided by Aid Access and others. This use has likely increased since the overturning of Roe v. Wade and the enactment of abortion restrictions in Republican-led states. Aid Access reported a 1,000% increase in orders from Texas after the state’s abortion law went into effect. Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America President Marjorie Dannenfelser said she doubts the legality of the "shield laws," which she said show no concern for the health of women. "Mailing abortion pills into pro-life states is not legal, no matter how the Democrats and their media cheerleaders want it to be. And the strong majority of Americans agree it is not safe," Dannenfelser said. "Biden and the Democrats show no concern for women’s safety or respect for the law and the will of the people. They are determined to impose their extreme abortion agenda at all costs, with no protections for women or children." The FDA sent Aid Access a cease-and-desist letter in 2019, which "determined that you cause the introduction into interstate commerce of misbranded and unapproved new drugs" in violation of federal law. The abortion pills consist of two drugs. Pregnant women first take mifepristone, which requires a prescription and terminates a developing fetus up to 10 weeks' gestation, then misoprostol, which stimulates the uterus to deliver the lifeless fetus. The pills can be taken and the fetus delivered at home without supervision from a doctor. While not nearly as fatal as surgical abortions, the abortion drugs have up to four times the complication rate due to extreme bleeding, cramping or complications delivering the fetus.






Article: 23
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Pro-life group addresses what went wrong in Ohio abortion vote, how to respond in 2024
Author:  Andrew Mark Miller
Publication_Date: Published November 8, 2023 4:49pm EST
Article_Content: Ohio voters approved a measure enshrining abortion into the state constitution Tuesday night Abortion politics are a continued problem for Republicans: Steven Law
Senate Leadership Fund CEO Steven Law provides analysis of the election night results after Republicans saw widespread losses in state and local races. One of the largest pro-life groups in the United States released a memo outlining why it believes a constitutional amendment enshrining abortion access into the Ohio constitution passed Tuesday night in a state Donald Trump carried by eight points in 2020. "In Ohio, pro-abortion forces spent a staggering $66.7 million, outspending pro-life forces by a 2:1 margin to fuel a campaign centered on lies and deception to muscle through a constitutional amendment designed to allow unlimited, unregulated abortion," Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, said in a memo released Wednesday. "The staggering sum spent by pro-abortion forces and the tens of millions of ‘in-kind’ contributions made by the media overwhelmed the ability of the pro-life movement and Governor DeWine to communicate the facts to the voters. In the closing weeks, pro-abortion forces outspent pro-life forces $19 million to $7.7 million on television, nearly a 3:1 advantage." In addition to being outspent and outblitzed on media channels, Dannenfelser wrote that pro-choice groups misleadingly framed Ohio Issue 1 as a situation where "women would be left to die" despite "clear language in Ohio’s law allowing for life-saving care." Abortion on the ballot in Ohio on Election Day 2023 People gather in the parking lot of the Hamilton County Board of Elections as people arrive for early in-person voting in Cincinnati. (AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster) "Further, the ballot language deceived voters into thinking the amendment allows for limits on abortion after the point of viability," Dannenfelser wrote. "In reality, the vague ‘health’ exception in its language is a major loophole that allows for late-term abortion without limit and allows the abortionist to determine viability." Ohioans voted in favor of Issue 1 Tuesday night by a margin of 13 points, after a contentious campaign between pro-life groups who argued the measure went "too far" and even further than Roe v. Wade, while pro-choice activists said the measure was necessary to codify abortion access into law after Roe’s reversal by the Supreme Court. "The future is bright, and tonight we can celebrate this win for bodily autonomy and reproductive rights," Lauren Blauvelt, co-chair of Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights, which led support for the amendment, told a jubilant crowd of supporters. Dannenfelser explained in her memo that the media "provided no fact-checking on the gaping lies told by the abortion lobby," including "claims that parental rights would be protected despite the ballot language making no distinction between adults and children in guaranteeing a right to abortion." Ohio abortion vote Claire Schmitt, an employee of the pro-life organization Protect Women Ohio, walks Nov. 3, 2023, in Westerville, Ohio. Tuesday’s ballot measure was seen by many as a signal for how abortion activists across the country would attempt to codify abortion into state constitutions nationwide, and Dannenfelser pointed out that "pro-abortion forces are already organizing major ballot initiatives across more states in 2024." "Pro-life and GOP forces must begin preparing for these fights now, most urgently raising the funds necessary to cut through the abortion lobby’s lies and deception, aided significantly by their allies in the media," Dannenfelser said. "Under this threat, GOP leaders in these states must step up to aid these efforts, the same way Governor Mike DeWine and Senator JD Vance did during the final stretch in Ohio." Dannenfelser's letter also touched on GOP losses in Virginia, where Democrats focused on the abortion issue in their successful push to prevent Republicans from taking control of the legislature. Ohio State Issue 1 An attendee holds a rosary as she prays during a "rosary rally" Aug. 6, 2023, in Norwood, Ohio. "While the GOP had a strong counter to Democratic attacks on abortion — focusing on a 15-week limit at a point when babies in the womb can feel pain, with exceptions, contrasted with Democrats’ no-limit position — they spent a relatively paltry amount ($2.2 million) driving their message on TV," Dannenfelser said. "While this is an improvement over the 2022 midterms when the GOP had no clearly defined position and was outspent 35:1 on abortion-focused advertising, it is still a significant gap that clearly made a difference in the outcome." Looking ahead to 2024, Dannenfelser said the GOP has to "lean in" and "define the issue," explaining that it is "long past due for the GOP to define where it stands on the issue nationally." "It should not be difficult: The GOP must align itself with the national consensus that already exists, which is limiting late-term abortion when the child can feel excruciating pain," Dannenfelser said, adding that "the GOP should contrast this stance of clarity and compassion with the Democrats, who do not support a single limit on abortion, celebrate abortion, and have long moved past the ‘pro-choice’ position."






Article: 24
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Biden called out by pro-life Democrat running protest campaign in gruesome anti-abortion ad
Author:  Taylor Penley 
Publication_Date: Published November 30, 2023 5:00am EST
Article_Content: Terrisa Bukovinac, former president of Democrats for Life of America, says she's determined to show the victims of abortion to the American people Pro-life Democrat challenging Biden discusses plan to show abortion victims in TV ad Democratic presidential candidate and pro-life activist Terrisa Bukovinac tells Fox News Digital about her plan to run an ad showing the victims of abortion. A pro-life progressive activist, who launched a protest campaign over President Biden's stance on abortion, says she's planning to call out pro-choice members of her party with a gruesome ad. "I chose to run for president for the purpose of running these ads," Terrisa Bukovinac told Fox News Digital on Monday.  "I had a life-changing experience in March of 2022. I recovered the remains of 115 aborted children, and five of them were past the age of viability. They were thrown into a box labeled medical waste and were headed for an incinerator in Baltimore. Disrupting that delivery of those fetal remains to the incinerator has rocked my world. There's just no coming back from that." Bukovinac, former founder of Pro-Life San Francisco and Progressive Anti-Abortion Uprising (PAAU), and former president of Democrats for Life of America, said being a federal candidate means any FCC TV station in any state where she is on the ballot must run her ads without censorship. Her candidacy is frequently not mentioned in reports about Biden's challengers on the Democratic side, but she has one goal in mind. Terrisa Bukovinac campaign ad Progressive pro-life activist and Democratic presidential candidate Terrisa Bukovinac aims to expose the reality of abortion. (Terrisa Bukovinac for President)
"Any state where I'm on the ballot, if there is an FCC signal that travels into those state lines, then they will be required by law to run my ad," she explained. "For example, in New Hampshire, I will be able to run ads out of Boston because the signal reaches into New Hampshire. I'm also targeting New Jersey. I would like to run ads there that will run into the Manhattan market. I'm also looking at getting on the ballot in Washington, D.C., which is one of the world's largest media markets and which will lend to the greatest exposure of the American people to these images, to these victims." It's a statement supported by federal telecommunications law stating that television stations "shall have no power of censorship over the material" in campaign ads. Hamline University political science professor David Schultz told VERIFY from Minneapolis NBC affiliate KARE 11 that the rationale behind prohibiting ad censorship is "the idea that candidates get to say what they want, and the voters get to sort through the marketplace of ideas and decide what's true, what's false." Bukovinac threw her hat in the ring back in September on the premise of calling out the "abortion industrial complex" and officials in her own party she says are behind the pro-choice push, including President Biden. Terrisa Bukovinac outside Supreme Court Terrisa Bukovinac speaks in front of the Supreme Court. (Terrisa Bukovinac) "I have seen the victims of the abortion extremism that comes from my party, the Democratic Party, and it is a direct result of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris' abortion policy, and I am determined to show these victims to the American people," she continued. Bukovinac also told Fox News Digital she's shaking up the party in hopes of bringing about justice for five nearly full-term aborted fetuses that, according to PAAU's website, were recovered from a box outside an abortion center in Washington, D.C. after being handed over by a whistleblower in March 2022. Bukovinac's ad shows gruesome footage of the bodies that were labeled as "medical waste." Many are in pieces. One appears to still be inside the amniotic sac. Another, almost fully developed, has one eye open. The ad's message to Democrats is to never vote for another pro-choice member of the party again. "We can provide for the working class and resist this extremism," she said in the ad, calling them "the faces of a genocide." Bukovinac said she additionally hopes her campaign will encourage Congress to hold hearings on the abortion issue and eventually pass a national ban. Terrisa Bukovinac at a campaign event Terrisa Bukovinac speaks at an event as supporters hold up signs behind her. (Bukovinac for President) "This is an attempt to show the American people what abortion extremism has done to these children and to give a voice to the fact that there are leftists like myself who recognize that abortion is a grave human rights violation and not something to be embraced by anyone, regardless of political party," she said. In the process, she's determined to prove to voters that "pro-life" and "progressive" are more complimentary than contrary, that messages of equality pushed by her party should also extend to equality for the unborn. Bukovinac says the ad has already been recorded and, once her campaign raises enough money to purchase the ad spot, it will run in New Hampshire. "It's exactly the message that we're hoping to deliver to voters in New Hampshire. Joe Biden is not running for president in New Hampshire. He has completely snubbed the New Hampshire primary, so there's very few options on the Democratic side. We're looking at Marianne Williamson [and] Representative Dean Phillips, and I think that there's a really good chance that voters could be impacted by this ad and that, potentially, we can show that a pro-life Democrat can perform well in a place like New Hampshire."






Article: 25
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Nebraska woman, 18, gets 90 days for getting illegal abortion with mom's help, burning fetus
Author:  Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published July 20, 2023 3:48pm EDT
Article_Content: Celeste Burgess' 42-year-old mother, Jessica, faces sentencing on Sept. 22 An 18-year-old northeastern Nebraska woman was sentenced Thursday to 90 days in jail and two years of probation for burning and burying a fetus she aborted with her mother's help in a case watched by advocates as a slew of states move to restrict abortion access. Celeste Burgess, of Norfolk, was sentenced in Madison County after pleading guilty earlier this year to concealing or abandoning a dead body. Two other misdemeanor charges of false reporting and concealing the death of another person were dropped, in an agreement with prosecutors. "The Court specifically finds that while probation is appropriate, confinement is necessary because without this confinement, it would depreciate the seriousness of the crime or promote disrespect for the law," the judge's order read. Burgess and her mother, 42-year-old Jessica Burgess of Norfolk, are accused of working together to end the pregnancy. The abortion, well into her third trimester, violated Nebraska law at the time that banned abortion after 20 weeks of gestation. Officials have said Jessica Burgess ordered abortion pills online, which she gave to her then-17-year-old daughter in the spring of 2022. Jessica Burgess pleaded guilty earlier this month to providing an illegal abortion, false reporting and tampering with human skeletal remains. In exchange for her plea, charges of concealing the death of another person and abortion by someone other than a licensed physician were dismissed. She faces sentencing on Sept. 22. Nebraska Capitol protest Pro-abortion protestors fill the Nebraska Capitol, Lincoln, Nebraska, May 16, 2023. Norfolk police detective opened an investigation into the abortion following a tip, according to an arrest affidavit. Police secured a search warrant to gain access to Facebook messages between the two, in which prosecutors say the women discussed terminating the pregnancy and destroying the evidence. Police then found the burned fetal remains buried in a field north of Norfolk. In one of the Facebook messages, Jessica Burgess instructed her daughter on how to take the pills to end the pregnancy, according to court records. In another, Celeste Burgess wrote, "I will finally be able to wear jeans," according to the documents. The U.S. Supreme Court last year overturned Roe v. Wade, which for 50 years had established the constitutional right to abortion. Nebraska lawmakers who opposed Republican's efforts to severely restrict abortion access in the legislative session that ended in June, repeatedly cited the Norfolk case, saying it shows state prosecutors would target women who seek abortions with criminal penalties. Republicans in the officially nonpartisan Nebraska Legislature failed this year to enact a six-week ban on abortions, but later passed a 12-week ban after adding it as an amendment to another bill to limit gender-affirming care for transgender youth. Opponents say that violated a Nebraska constitutional requirement that legislative bills stick to a single subject. The ACLU has sued to overturn the abortion ban and transgender care bill.






Article: 26
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: NYC church swarmed by pro-abortion protesters: 'I'm killing the babies'
Author:  Andrew Mark Miller
Publication_Date: Published May 8, 2022 12:00am EDT
Article_Content: Abortion groups have called for nationwide protests in response to the potential striking down of Roe v. Wade Abortion advocates gather outside Old St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York City Pro-choice protestors gather outside Old St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York City to protest the leaked draft indicating the Supreme Court's intent to overturn Roe v. Wade. Pro-abortion activists descended upon an iconic New York City church on Saturday as an anti-abortion group showed up once again in their monthly routine of demonstrating outside a nearby Planned Parenthood clinic. The activists showed up at the Basilica of St. Patrick's Old Cathedral in Manhattan on Saturday morning, just feet from a group of anti-abortion protesters who typically walk from the church to a nearby Planned Parenthood site on the first Saturday of every month, according to WNYW-TV. New York City abortion protest Anti-abortion activists and church members are confronted by a pro-choice activist outside of a Catholic church in downtown Manhattan  "I'm killing the babies!" one protester screamed while waving around dolls wearing a one-piece bathing suit. Abortion-rights activists gather outside of a Catholic church in downtown Manhattan to voice their support for a woman's right to choose on May 07, 2022 in New York City. One pro-abortion protester was photographed holding a sign that said "abortion is a gift." Another sign said, "RIP Jesus, killed by ‘woke’ deadbeat dad." Several pro-life demonstrators could be seen standing outside the church. "We’re proud to see members of our Catholic Caucus @CatholicNYYRC standing up for their beliefs and for the fundamental rights of all unborn Americans," the New York Young Republican Club tweeted. The abortion protest comes days after a leaked Supreme Court document suggested that Roe v. Wade is on the verge of being struck down by the court which prompted uproar across the country from abortion supporters. Abortion-rights activists gather outside of a Catholic church in downtown Manhattan to voice their support for a woman's right to choose on May 07, 2022 in New York City.   A pro-choice group named Ruth Sent Us, a reference to late Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, has called on abortion supporters to protest at Catholic churches across the country over the Mother's Day Weekend. "Whether you’re a ‘Catholic for Choice,’ ex-Catholic, of other or no faith, recognize that six extremist Catholics set out to overturn Roe," the group tweeted this week. "Stand at or in a local Catholic Church Sun May 8. #WarOnWomen #MothersDayStrike." The New York City Police Department did not immediately respond to a request for comment from Fox News.






Article: 27
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: 5 things to know about Ohio's controversial constitutional amendment on abortion before Election Day
Author: Andrew Mark Miller 
Publication_Date: Published November 6, 2023 2:44pm EST
Article_Content: Turnout for Tuesday's abortion vote is expected to be robust Ohio governor urges voters to oppose abortion amendment to the constitution that goes "way, way too far" Ohio’s Republican Gov. Mike DeWine spoke to Fox News Digital about how a November abortion measure in Ohio is too extreme for Ohio and goes even farther than Roe v. Wade. Ohio voters will head to the voting booth on Tuesday to vote on a measure that will enshrine abortion access into the state’s constitution in an election that is believed to be a bellwether for how states will be governed on abortion post the Supreme Court’s reversal of Roe v. Wade. What does a "yes" or "no" vote on Ohio Issue 1 mean? Voters in Ohio who vote "yes" on Issue 1 are voting to approve an amendment that would "establish in the Constitution of the State of Ohio an individual right to one’s own reproductive medical treatment, including but not limited to abortion" and "create legal protections for any person or entity that assists a person with receiving reproductive medical treatment." A "no" vote continues with the status quo in terms of Ohio laws already on the books and leaves current abortion restrictions intact. Who supports and opposes the ballot measure? "Yes" on Issue 1 supporters include Ohioans United for Reproductive Right, a coalition of pro-abortion groups, Planned Parenthood, the Human Rights Campaign and the ACLU of Ohio who argue the vote is about "who makes personal decisions for yourself and your family – you or the government." Opponents of Issue 1 include top elected Republicans in the state, Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, many faith based groups including the Catholic Conference of Ohio, and Christians for Civic Virtue. Ohio abortion vote Claire Schmitt, an employee of the anti-abortion organization Protect Women Ohio, walks on November 3, 2023 in Westerville, Ohio. Ohioans will vote on Issue 1, officially titled "The Right to Reproductive Freedom with Protections for Health and Safety," which would codify reproductive rights in the Ohio Constitution Last month, a bipartisan group of 100 Black pastors signed a letter opposing Issue 1 writing that it is "more extreme than Roe v. Wade" and "will allow for painful, late-term abortions through all nine months of pregnancy – even after an unborn baby can feel pain." "It will permit our children to undergo abortions without parents knowing. And it will continue to rob generations of Black women and men of the insurmountable joy of parenthood," the letter said. Parents rights advocates have also been involved opposing Issue 1 including Protect Women Ohio. "The ACLU paid out-of-state signature collectors to lie to Ohioans about their dangerous amendment that will strip parents of their rights, permit minors to undergo sex change operations without their parents’ knowledge or consent, and allow painful abortion on demand through all nine months," PWO spokesperson Amy Natoce said. Top Republicans in Ohio have warned the "extreme" ballot measure goes "too far" and goes even farther than Roe v. Wade. Mike DeWine Republican Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine "It's pretty clear that this constitutional amendment just goes farther, much further than what the average Ohioan approves," Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine told Fox News Digital last month. "If a voter is comfortable with abortion up until the time of birth, they're probably going to be okay with this amendment — if they're comfortable with parents not being involved in the most important decision their daughter will ever make or certainly has made up until that point in her life. If they're okay with that, then they should vote for this," DeWine added. Ohio’s Republican attorney general, Dave Yost, published a report on what he believes a "Yes" vote would mean for the future of abortion in Ohio and wrote that the language of the amendment "creates a new, legal standard that goes beyond what Roe and Casey said." Ohio State Issue 1 An attendee holds a rosary as she prays during a "rosary rally" on Sunday, Aug. 6, 2023, in Norwood, Ohio. "The Amendment would not return things to how they were before Dobbs overruled Roe, and is not just ‘restoring Roe,’" Yost said. "It goes further." Yost wrote that several abortion restrictions in the state would be invalidated if the new amendment passes including the Heartbeat Act, the Down Syndrome discrimination law, and the law prohibiting partial birth abortion. Additionally, Yost concludes that several other aspects related to abortion might not immediately be invalidated but will face serious legal challenges with an "uncertain outcome" in courts due to the vague language. Those issues include 24-hour waiting period and informed consent, Ohio law that requires a doctor to inform a minor’s parents before performing an abortion on a pregnant minor, abortion pill safety regulations, limits against taxpayer funds for abortion providers. Both sides of the argument have accused the other side of running misleading ads and voters have expressed confusion on what the amendment will actually do "I think that most people are trying to understand if this amendment would give them more health protections and our stance has been it actually takes away basic health and care protections for women," Mehek Cooke an attorney who serves as spokesperson for Protect Women Ohio, told Fox News Digital.  "The other side continues to say that Ohio law contains no exceptions for the life of the mothers actually Ohio law permits abortions up until 22 weeks with the exception of immediate serious risk to the mother. There are several exceptions in Ohio law and we've really had to correct that misinformation." Cooke told Fox News Digital that Ohio law currently protects serious medical conditions during pregnancy, something she has experienced first hand, and that the other side has used "scaremongering" tactics by claiming women will not be able to access medical treatment if the ballot measure fails. ACLU logo An ACLU press release quoted Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights spokesperson Lauren Blauvelt last month saying opponents of Issue 1 are the "extremists" and are "trying to take away our rights and mislead voters." Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights spokesperson Lauren Blauvelt said in an ACLU press release last month that its the opponents of Issue 1 that are the "extremists" who are "trying to take away our rights and mislead voters." "Voting NO hands your most personal family decisions over to the GOVERNMENT," Blauvelt said. Abortion supporters and opponents nationwide will be watching to see how the amendment fares in a red state that former President Trump carried by 8 points and if any lessons will be learned in other states planning to vote on abortion after the reversal of Roe  Mini Timmaraju, president and CEO of Reproductive Freedom for All, said Ohio offers a vital proving ground heading into next year’s presidential election, when Democrats hope the abortion issue can energize supporters in contests up and down the ballot. Abortion-related initiatives could be on the ballot across the country, including in the presidential swing states of Arizona, Nevada and Pennsylvania. "When we’re able to see how our messaging impacts independents and Republicans and persuades them that this fundamental freedom is important to protect in Ohio, that’s going to be something that we can implement looking at 2024," she said. Marching through the streets Protestors hold signs as they march through the streets of New York City in response to the Supreme Court's ruling on Roe v. Wade. (Fox News Digital) The battleground on abortion shifted to the states last summer, when the U.S. Supreme Court overturned its Roe v. Wade decision, erasing federal abortion protections that had been in place for half a century. Since then, voters in six states — California, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan, Montana and Vermont — have either supported measures protecting abortion rights or rejected efforts aimed at eroding access. Turnout in the election that concludes Tuesday is expected to be robust, building on the enthusiasm from the summer, organizers say. Local election officials anticipate 40% to 50% of registered voters will participate, according to the Ohio Association of Election Officials. That’s higher than a typical off-year November election and up from the 39% turnout in August.





Article: 28
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: DeSantis warns pro-life voters Trump will 'sell you out' after ex-president's critique of 6-week abortion ban
Author:  Danielle Wallace
Publication_Date: Published September 19, 2023 11:49am EDT
Article_Content: Former President Trump ripped Florida Gov Ron DeSantis’ 6-week abortion ban as ‘a terrible thing and a terrible mistake’ Kevin McCarthy says Trump, not DeSantis, will be the 2024 GOP nominee Speaker of the House Kevin McCarthy sits down with Maria Bartiromo and discusses his thoughts on former President Donald Trump and Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis. Republican presidential candidate and Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis warned pro-life Americans that former President Trump will "sell you out" after the current 2024 GOP frontrunner’s recent critique of six-week abortion bans. In an interview on Radio Iowa Monday, DeSantis reacted to Trump's appearance on NBC's "Meet the Press" Sunday, the first network news interview the former president has given since leaving office. While DeSantis said Trump deserves credit for his accomplishments on court appointments, the Abraham Accords, deregulation and other topics, the Florida governor vying for the White House took issue with Trump's promise of securing a deal between Democrats and Republicans on the number of weeks into pregnancy that is best for restricting abortion. "Anytime he did a deal with Democrats, whether it was on budget, whether it was on the criminal justice ‘First Step Act,’ they ended up taking him to the cleaners, and so, I think if he’s going into this thing, he’s gonna make the Democrats happy with respect to the right to life. I think all pro-lifers should know that he’s preparing to sell you out," DeSantis said. "Protecting babies with heartbeats is not terrible. Donald Trump may think it’s terrible. I think protecting babies with heartbeats is noble and just, and I’m proud to have signed the heartbeat bill in Florida, and I know Iowa has similar legislation," DeSantis told Radio Iowa Monday. Trump and DeSantis Former President Trump, left, and Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis butt heads on the abortion issue. Trump told NBC's Kristen Walker that he believed DeSantis' decision to sign a six-week abortion ban was a "terrible thing and a terrible mistake."  "But at the same time, Democrats won't be able to go out in six months, seven months, eight months and allow an abortion," Trump added. Trump addresses DC conference Former President Trump addresses the Concerned Women for America Legislative Action Committee on Sept. 15, 2023 in Washington, D.C. While state law in Florida currently prohibits most abortions after 15 weeks, DeSantis, in April, signed the Heartbeat Protection Act, which aims to restrict abortions after six weeks gestation, with exceptions including women who are victims of rape, incest and human trafficking, or whose baby has a devastating diagnosis of a fatal fetal abnormality. A court ruling this fall could determine whether the law will take effect, as activists on both sides raise petitions to amend the state constitution in their favor.  "I don’t know how you can even make the claim that you’re somehow pro-life if you’re criticizing states for enacting pro-life protections for babies that have heartbeats," DeSantis said Monday. "I thought him saying that those bills were terrible I think was a terrible statement, and I think it’s a window into how he’s changing as he’s running this campaign, and I think he’s changing in a way that’s not consistent with the values with the people in Iowa."  During the NBC interview, Trump was pressed on whether he would support a 15-week federal ban on abortion, but the former president declined to specify a number of weeks. Trump instead credited himself for the Supreme Court's overturn of Roe V. Wade, which he says gave pro-life Americans bargaining power for the first time in over half a century. DeSantis addresses Pray Vote Stand Summit  Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis waves during the Family Research Council and FRC Action annual Pray Vote Stand Summit in Washington, D.C., on Friday, Sept. 15, 2023. "For 52 years, people, including Democrats, wanted it to go back to states," Trump said. "I did something that nobody thought was possible. And Roe v Wade was terminated. It was put back to the states. Now, people – pro-lifers have the right to negotiate. For the first time. They had no rights at all because the radical people on this are really the people, the Democrats, that say after five months, six months, seven months, eight months, nine months, and even after birth you're allowed to terminate the baby. "  DeSantis, by contrast, said the pro-life movement was not prepared for the Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization last year, arguing conservatives need to be prepared moving forward as the "left is going to try to put something on the ballot in Florida to overturn the heartbeat bill." 






Article: 29
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Pro-abortion groups target churches for Mother's Day protests
Author: Tyler O'Neil  
Publication_Date: Published May 6, 2022 2:07am EDT
Article_Content: Organizers targeted churches for protest, claiming that 'six extremist Catholics set out to overturn Roe' Pro-abortion activists are targeting Catholic churches for protests on Mother's Day, with some citing the Roman Catholic faith of multiple justices who reportedly at one point supported the leaked draft opinion striking down Roe v. Wade. The protests follow days of organizing in front of the Supreme Court building following the leak Monday night – protests that led the Washington, D.C., police to erect a fence ostensibly to protect the building and justices within. Fox News has also learned that there has been a strong police presence at the justices' homes following the leak. "Whether you’re a ‘Catholic for Choice’, ex-Catholic, of other or no faith, recognize that six extremist Catholics set out to overturn Roe," the pro-abortion organizing group Ruth Sent Us posted on Twitter, with a video of activists appearing to disrupt a church service. "Stand at or in a local Catholic Church Sun May 8." Supreme Court protest A crowd of people gather outside the Supreme Court, Monday night, May 2, 2022, in Washington following reports of a leaked draft opinion by the court overturning Roe v. Wade. The organization Rise Up 4 Abortion Rights has organized a "week of action" beginning on May 8, Mother's Day, with "Actions Outside of Churches." "This action is called for by a collective of spanish [sic] speaking women’s rights groups + activists across the country, including from Bride’s March, Dominican Women’s Development Center, Ni Una Menus, and Las 17," according to the event schedule. "Several cities will be hosting protests outside of prominent churches in their towns, these can look like a group of people holding signs wearing Handmaids Tale outfits, passing out flyers outside to church goers or doing a die-in." Abortion activists don "Handmaid's Tale" outfits in protest, comparing laws restricting abortion to the regime of ritualized rape and forced motherhood in Margaret Atwood's novel. Pro-abortion vandals targeted a church in Boulder, Colorado, Wednesday, spray-painting "bans off our bodies" and "my body my choice" on the building. Vandalism on the Sacred Heart of Mary Church. (Mark Haas) Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts confirmed Tuesday that Justice Samuel Alito's draft opinion in the case Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization was genuine – although the draft dates back to February, and it does not represent the current or final opinion of the court. In the draft, Alito strikes down Roe v. Wade, which struck down state laws across the country, and allows states to again make their own laws on abortion. Following the leak, activists have called for protests at the homes of the justices who will supposedly vote to overturn Roe, and even published their addresses online. It remains unclear whether the Court will overturn Roe in the Dobbs decision, and which justices will vote in favor of the move. The Politico story reporting the link claimed that five justices had voted to do so, and that Roberts favored upholding the Mississippi abortion law at issue but did not want to overturn Roe. Activists opposed to the confirmation of President Donald Trump's Supreme Court nominee, Judge Amy Coney Barrett, are dressed as characters from "The Handmaid's Tale," at the Supreme Court on Capitol Hill, Oct. 11, 2020. Brian Burch, president of the Catholic advocacy organization Catholic Vote, condemned the planned protests and urged President Biden – who has faced criticism for claiming a Catholic identity while supporting abortion – to condemn what Burch called "domestic terrorist threats." "In the wake of the shameless leak of a draft opinion of the Supreme Court, pro-abortion groups are now threatening to disrupt Catholic churches and to protest outside the homes of Supreme Court justices this Sunday," Burch noted in a statement Thursday. "President Biden must immediately and forcibly condemn these domestic terrorist threats," Burch declared. "Anti-Catholic zealots are plotting to intimidate and harass Catholics across the country, along with justices and their families. This country was built on freedom of speech and freedom of religion. The President of the United States must stand up for both." "These threats follow a record number of attacks on Catholic churches, shrines, and symbols over the past two years," the Catholic Vote president added, citing the Boulder vandalism. Catholic Vote has urged the Department of Justice to investigate the trend of anti-Catholic vandalism, citing at least 120 instances since May 2020. The White House on Thursday declined to encourage abortion activists to avoid protesting at justices' private residences. White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki said that Biden "shares" the "concern" and "horror" of those who "feel outraged" or "scared" over the leaked draft opinion. When Fox News' Peter Doocy asked Psaki if abortion protests outside justices' houses might be considered extreme, she said, "Peaceful protest, no. Peaceful protest is not extreme. We certainly encourage people to keep it peaceful and not resort to any level of violence." Contrary to Ruth Sent Us, the justices who voted to overturn Roe were not "six extremist Catholics." While Justices Alito, Clarence Thomas, Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett are Catholic, Neil Gorsuch, the ostensible fifth vote, is Episcopalian. Roberts and Justice Sonia Sotomayor are also Catholic, though they reportedly did not vote to overturn Roe. Justices Stephen Breyer and Elena Kagan are Jewish, while incoming Justice Ketanji Brown Jackson is a nondenominational Protestant.




Article: 30
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: DeSantis signs 15-week abortion ban into law
Author: Anders Hagstrom 
Publication_Date: Published April 14, 2022 12:24pm EDT
Article_Content: Pro-life activists shared stories of regretted abortions and adoptions of children who survived attempted abortions Republican Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis signed legislation banning abortions past 15 weeks on Thursday. The legislation allows for abortions past 15 weeks only in situations involving a "fatal fetal abnormality," and makes no exceptions for rape or incest. The law limits the time an abortion is legal by nine weeks, as abortions were previously banned in the state past 24 weeks. DeSantis emphasized that the legislation is not the only aspect of his pro-life agenda, adding that the bill also allocates funds to increase the number of infant mortality review boards across Florida. "If you're looking at what we've done this week, we're promoting fatherhood in Florida," DeSantis said. "We want our kids to have dads in the home. We want the fathers present and to take responsibility. It's the most important thing you can do is to take responsibility for the upbringing of your kids." DeSantis was joined by numerous pro-life activists at the bill signing event. Some of the activists shared stories of abortions they regretted, others of adopting children who had survived abortion attempts. "There are two types of people that have led me to speak up," said Heather Grall-Barwick, who said she had an abortion when she was 21. "The women who say that abortion does not cause mental distress, and the women in their 70s who had abortions and testified that just now they're able to speak about them and the regret that they have felt for over 40 years." Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis. (Screenshot/Twitter/@GovRonDeSantis) Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis. "I made a mistake that I cannot change, but I can let others learn from my mistake," she added. The legislation is slated to go into effect July 1.  DeSantis' move comes on the heels of a six-week abortion ban in Texas. Mississippi also enacted a 15-week abortion ban last year. Both the Mississippi law and the Texas law have been challenged before the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court has allowed the Texas ban to remain in effect while the case is being decided, a controversial decision in itself. Justice Sonia Sotomayor railed against her colleagues' decision to allow the ban to remain in effect in December.  "The chilling effect has been near total, depriving pregnant women in Texas of virtually all opportunity to seek abortion care within their home State after their sixth week of pregnancy," she said of the law.  "The Court instead hides behind a wooden reading of Young, stitching out-of-context quotations into a cover for its failure to act decisively," she argued.






Article: 31
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Youngkin performs 2024 litmus test on abortion in urging Virginia Republicans to support 15-week restriction
Author:  Danielle Wallace
Publication_Date: Published October 25, 2023 7:32am EDT
Article_Content: Virginia gov running ad blitz for restricting abortion at 15 weeks ahead of state's Nov. 7 General Assembly elections Children belong to families, not to the state: Glenn Youngkin FOX News contributor Dr. Marc Siegel asks Virginia Gov. Glenn Youngkin about his actions to lower young girls’ suicide rates, the fentanyl crisis and parent’s rights. Virginia Gov. Glenn Youngkin is conducting a 2024 litmus test on abortion by urging state Republicans to support a 15-week ban ahead of next month’s legislative elections.  The governor is helping GOP candidates running in Virginia’s Nov. 7 elections for all 140 seats in the General Assembly potentially align themselves with a 15-week limit on abortion with exceptions for rape, incest and the life of the pregnant women as a "reasonable" and "common" approach, The Washington Post reported.  A $1.4 million ad blitz funded by Youngkin’s Spirit of Virginia group promoted the policy, saying, "Here’s the truth: There is no ban." Next month’s election in Virginia is the only major race in the country ahead of the 2024 presidential and congressional elections, so Youngkin’s strategy is viewed a critical test for national Republicans who have struggled on a common pro-life message since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. Youngkin gives a thumbs up Virginia Gov. Glenn Youngkin gives a thumbs-up during an Economic Club of Washington event on Sept. 26, 2023, in Washington, DC.  (Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images)
Though Democrats running for Virginia’s General Assembly out-raised Republicans in September, Youngkin has drawn from his national fundraising – which has seen surges amid the governor’s own flirtation with a potential presidential run – to throw support behind helping the state GOP maintain control of the House of Delegates and flip the Democratic-controlled Senate, the Post reported.  If he succeeds, it will give him more leeway to push a conservative agenda not only including limits on abortions but also tax cuts, stricter criminal justice laws and more lenient environmental restrictions.  In the 2022 elections, national Republicans were caught flat-footed on the abortion issue, while Democrats successfully rallied support in many races after the Dobbs ruling. "There was no Republican response, none, and the results were tough in the ’22 midterms," Zack Roday, a spokesman for Youngkin’s Spirit of Virginia PAC, told the Post. "Republicans didn’t talk about where they were. They didn’t swat back the misstatements, the sometimes outright lies." Youngkin at Economic Club of Washington Virginia Gov. Glen Youngkin talks with guests following an Economic Club of Washington luncheon event on Sept. 26, 2023, in Washington, DC.   (Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images)
Taking a beating by some pro-life groups, GOP presidential candidate and former President Donald Trump said it could be detrimental for the Republican Party in 2024 if they don’t reach a consensus on abortion, describing Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis’ support of a 6-week abortion ban as a "terrible thing."  Youngkin’s strategy, which seeks to provide a roadmap for how to tackle abortion on the state and federal level, could prove risky to his own national prospects, as not many Republican candidates running in his state have embraced the 15-week restriction ahead of November. The media tracking firm AdImpact found that abortion is mentioned in 42% of ads aired by Democratic House and Senate candidates in Virginia through Oct. 17, compared to just 3% of those aired by Republicans. Youngkin on stage Virginia Gov. Glen Youngkin addresses the Economic Club of Washington's luncheon event at the Marriott Marquis on Sept. 26, 2023. Virginia Democrats in turn have flooded ad dollars into arguing Youngkin’s strategy equates to a "ban." "I hope they keep it up," Democratic Party of Virginia chairwoman Susan Swecker told the Post of Youngkin's ad campaign. "We’re the only Southern state that doesn’t ban abortion and [protecting access] is something that resonates across the commonwealth in all social, economic and diverse communities."





Article: 32
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Abortion chatbot Charley helps women end their pregnancies: 'Let's get started'
Author:  Melissa Rudy 
Publication_Date: Published September 19, 2023 4:00am EDT
Article_Content: Chatbot was co-founded by ex-Planned Parenthood leadership — Fox News Digital spoke to the company and to doctors Nikki Haley searches for common ground on combustible issue of abortion 'to save as many babies as we can' Former ambassador and former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley, a 2024 Republican presidential candidate, searches for common ground on the combustible issue of abortion For those women who are considering terminating their pregnancies, a new chatbot called Charley aims to help them start the process of getting an abortion. The chatbot, which launched on Sept. 12, is available on Charley’s website, greeting visitors with the message, "Need an abortion? Let’s get started." On its website, Charley is described as "designed by abortion experts, made for abortion seekers." One of its co-founders is Cecile Richards, former president of Planned Parenthood. Richards "oversees legal, political, and policy matters and leads fundraising efforts" for Charley, according to the chatbot’s website. Another co-founder is Tom Subak, former chief strategy officer at Planned Parenthood. Woman upset A new chatbot called Charley aims to help women start the process of getting an abortion. (iStock) Charley isn’t an app — it lives online, on its own website.  While individuals can freely visit the site, the company is also seeking medical providers who will agree to embed the chatbot directly on their own websites, "to meet abortion seekers wherever they are online," said Nicole Cushman, Charley’s New York-based content manager, in an interview with Fox News Digital. Cushman, who has held leadership positions at Planned Parenthood, said the idea for the chatbot came about after Roe v. Wade was overturned — with the goal of "improving people’s online search experience." "Our research showed that people were turning primarily to Google for information about abortion options in the post-Roe landscape, and that it was very challenging for abortion seekers to connect to available options," she said. People "were ending up in an endless Google loop." "This was particularly the case if they were living in a state with an abortion ban or restriction — they were ending up in an endless Google loop."  Cecile Richards One of Charley's co-founders is Cecile Richards, former president of Planned Parenthood. The company is seeking medical providers who will agree to embed the chatbot directly on their own websites. (Charley) Charley’s creators envisioned a "simple, effective way to pull together information from a range of sources" and "cut through the confusion," Cushman told Fox News Digital.  How Charley work Unlike large language models like ChatGPT, Charley doesn’t allow people to type questions. Instead, the chatbot uses a "decision tree" format that guides visitors through a series of pre-written prompts, including the desired type of abortion and the date of their last menstrual period. It also asks for a zip code to determine the specific abortion laws in the visitor’s state of residence. For example, when Fox News Digital entered a zip code in Ohio, the response was: "Currently, abortion care is legal in Ohio, but only up to 22 weeks. This means that, if you act quickly, you‘ll be able to get abortion care in your state. If you need more time or can’t get an appointment before then, you may still have options in another state." For abortion seekers under 18 years of age, Charley notifies them whether state law requires a parent’s permission to get an abortion — and also offers assistance for minors to ask a judge for permission to get the procedure on their own. Charley chatbot The chatbot uses a "decision tree" format that guides visitors through a series of pre-written prompts, including the desired type of abortion and the date of their last menstrual period. (Charley) At the end of the series of questions, the chatbot provides a summary of expected costs, alternate funding options and a directory of resources to find an abortion provider. "Those resources might include a link to a directory to locate the nearest clinic, a link to telehealth providers — or help lines for legal, medical, financial or emotional support," Cushman told Fox News Digital. "Our research showed that people were turning primarily to Google for information about abortion options." The pre-scripted information provided by the chatbot was developed by a team of "medical and legal experts," she added. Potential risks of the abortion chatbot Charley is designed as a "triage solution" to provide information and education so that people can make "an informed decision" about their next steps, Cushman said. "For some people, the next best step may be to make an appointment to see a provider in person, or to call a hotline for more direct support," she noted. "There’s no harm in chatting with Charley, but it’s not the end of their journey," she also said. Tom Subak. Tom Subak, former chief strategy officer at Planned Parenthood, is also a co-founder of Charley. Security and privacy has been an area of "heightened concern" among people searching for abortion care online, a content manager from the company shared with Fox News Digital.  (Charley) At some points during the chat, Charley may quickly hand off the visitor to an external resource — for example, if she is experiencing a medical emergency or potential pregnancy complications, Cushman noted. She also said, however, that not all pregnant women require in-person care before seeking an abortion. "Plenty of research shows that telehealth is a safe and effective way to access medication abortion," Cushman told Fox News Digital.  "If there are no extenuating circumstances — especially if someone is earlier in the pregnancy — they can navigate through Charley to access additional resources or other hotlines." Security and privacy has been an area of "heightened concern" among people searching for abortion care online, Cushman said. Charley abortion chatbot At the end of a series of questions, the chatbot provides a summary of expected costs, alternate funding options and a directory of resources.  (Charley) The chatbot does not ask for any identifying information, she pointed out — just the person's zip code and date of her last menstrual period. "We put fear of surveillance and criminalization front and center when designing Charley," she noted. "We don’t use any tracking tools, cookies or pixels, and we don’t share information with any third party." All conversations are deleted from their system "regularly," Cushman said. Experts stress face-to-face discussion Dr. Kecia Gaither, a double board-certified OB/GYN and director of maternal fetal medicine at NYC Health + Hospitals/Lincoln in the Bronx, described Charley as a "brilliant tool to assist women in locales where reproductive options are either restricted or prohibited." "Given the reality that almost half of the U.S. has banned or restricted reproductive options, Charley will likely serve as a lifeline to many women," she told Fox News Digital. "Compassionate and comprehensive care is essential, especially during something so personal as an abortion." Gaither said there are a "multitude of reasons why reproductive options are needed," pointing to scenarios like "congenital fetal anomalies" or issues where giving birth could "compromise the mother’s health or even kill her." The doctor did add, however, that face-to-face discussion with a health provider is always recommended as the first avenue for any woman seeking reproductive options. Stressed woman at work Face-to-face discussion with a health provider is recommended as the first avenue for any woman seeking reproductive options, a board-certified OB/GYN and director of maternal fetal medicine told Fox News Digital. Dr. Laura Purdy, a board-certified family medicine physician in Miami, Florida, said she values in-person interaction to ensure that women who are considering abortion are aware of the emotional implications of their decision — which can range from anxiety to grief. "Chatbots are a great way to offer advice, and I can understand their appeal," she told Fox News Digital.  "However, the health of women is a very personal matter that demands a lot of attention." "I would recommend thoroughly researching the side effects that an abortion can have on a woman’s body, and see a doctor after that decision to ensure that your mental state is being cared for." "I think compassionate and more comprehensive care is essential, especially during something so personal as an abortion." Purdy, who practices telemedicine herself, said that she "very much values technology to improve women’s health care." But with telehealth, she said, "you are still talking to a real human, who provides empathy and individual care." "Ultimately, it is a preference, but I would recommend thoroughly researching the side effects that an abortion can have on a woman’s body, and see a doctor after that decision to ensure that your mental state is being cared for," she recommended.Dr. Marc Siegel, clinical professor of medicine at NYU Langone Medical Center and a Fox News medical contributor, said that while he is a "big believer" in AI applications in health care, "I don't think this one works." Doctor with woman One doctor noted that in his view, the chatbot has an orientation in the direction of "subtly moving people toward abortions by not providing an alternative focus of valuing the life that could come from this." (iStock) To test the bot, Siegel entered information as if someone in an early stage of pregnancy, he told Fox News Digital. "It is front-loaded with basic information regarding where and how, and [offers] options, but is less interactive than I was expecting," he said. "It is also kind of clunky, which is especially problematic in an area where sensitivity and empathy are required." The doctor also noted that the chatbot has an orientation in the direction of "subtly moving people toward abortions by not providing an alternative focus of valuing the life that could come from this." Dr. Siegel added, "Imagine if the bot started out by asking, ‘Do you know how many women wish they were in your position? Do you know how many have tried to become pregnant but can't? Here are those statistics.’"








Article: 33
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Indiana becomes first state in nation to approve near-total abortion ban post Roe
Author:  Landon Mion 
Publication_Date: Published August 5, 2022 11:52pm EDT
Article_Content: Indiana's abortion ban does include some exceptions Indiana Republican Gov. Eric Holcomb signed a bill Friday evening prohibiting most abortions. The new law bans the procedure except in cases of rape, incest and to protect the life and physical health of the mother. The rape and incest exceptions only apply in the first 10 weeks post-fertilization. Victims would not be required to sign a notarized affidavit attesting to an attack, which had previously been proposed. Abortions will also be allowed if a fetus is diagnosed with a lethal anomaly. According to the bill, abortions can only be performed in hospitals or outpatient centers owned by hospitals. This means all abortion clinics would lose their licenses. A doctor who performs an illegal abortion or fails to file necessary reports will also lose their medical license. Eric Holcomb signed wearing a blue shirt Indiana Republican Gov. Eric Holcomb signed a bill Friday evening prohibiting most abortions. (AP) Indiana is the first state in the nation to approve new legislation restricting abortion access since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June. It became the first state to pass a ban through both chambers of the Legislature after West Virginia lawmakers passed up the opportunity to be the first on July 29. "Following the overturning of Roe, I stated clearly that I would be willing to support legislation that made progress in protecting life," Holcomb said in a statement. "In my view, [the abortion law] accomplishes this goal." The Indiana Senate approved the legislation 28 to 19 on Friday, just hours after the House passed it by a 62 to 38 vote. GOP Rep. Wendy McNamara told reporters after the vote in the House that the legislation makes Indiana "one of the most pro-life states in the nation." Women’s March activists holding signs Indiana is the first state in the nation to approve new legislation restricting abortion access since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June. And fellow Republican Rep. Ann Vermilion slammed the members of her party who have called women "murderers" for receiving an abortion. "I think that the Lord’s promise is for grace and kindness," she said. "He would not be jumping to condemn these women." In the Senate, eight Republicans joined all 11 Democrats in voting against the bill. Democratic Sen. Jean Breaux wore a green ribbon on her lapel on Friday to signify her support for abortion access. "We are backsliding on democracy," she said. "What other freedoms, what other liberties are on the chopping block, waiting to be stripped away?" GOP Sen. Mike Bohacek, whose 21-year-old-daughter has Down syndrome, said the legislation does not have adequate protections for women with disabilities who are raped. Republican Sen. Sue Glick said she does not believe "all states will come down at the same place" but that most Indiana residents support aspects of the bill. An abortion protest at the U.S. Supreme Court The Indiana Senate approved the abortion ban 28 to 19 on Friday, just hours after the House passed it by a 62 to 38 vote. Gov. Eric Holcomb then signed it almost immediately after it hit his desk. (AP Photo/Ross D. Franklin) The ban will take effect on September 15. "To the people of Indiana, let me assure you that the democratic process marches on, and you should continue to reach out to all your elected representatives to have your voice heard," Holcomb said in his statement. "Looking back, I am personally most proud of each Hoosier who came forward to courageously share their views in a debate that is unlikely to cease any time soon. For my part as your governor, I will continue to keep an open ear." Indiana Senate Democrats lashed over the ban on Twitter. The group wrote, "A massive government overreach. State-mandated pregnancy. A rollback of women's rights. A failure of democracy. Call it what you want – it's a stain on our state."




Article: 34
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: US Department of Justice challenges Alabama's attempt to prosecute abortion assistance
Author:  Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published November 10, 2023 10:17am EST
Article_Content:  AL remains one of several states where abortion is almost entirely illegal Abortion politics are a 'continued problem' for Republicans: Steven Law Senate Leadership Fund CEO Steven Law provides analysis of the election night results after Republicans saw widespread losses in state and local races. The U.S. Department of Justice on Thursday said Alabama cannot use conspiracy laws to prosecute people and groups who help women leave the state to obtain abortions. The Justice Department filed a statement of its position in consolidated lawsuits against Alabama Attorney General Steve Marshall, arguing that such prosecutions would be unconstitutional. The lawsuits, filed by an abortion fund and former providers, seek a court ruling clarifying the state can’t use conspiracy statutes to prosecute people who help Alabama women travel elsewhere to obtain an abortion. Marshall has not prosecuted anyone for providing such assistance, but he has made statements saying that his office would "look at" groups that provide abortion help. The Justice Department argued in the filing that the U.S. Constitution protects the right to travel. The department said that just as Marshall cannot stop women from crossing state lines to obtain a legal abortion, "neither can he seek to achieve the same result by threatening to prosecute anyone who assists that individual in their travel." Fox News Alabama graphic The legal dispute in Alabama comes as several Texas counties have enacted ordinances seeking to block travel on local roads to get to where abortion is legal. Alabama is one of several states where abortion is almost entirely illegal after the U.S. Supreme Court, in a decision known as Dobbs, handed authority on abortion law to the states. Alabama bans abortion at any stage of pregnancy with no exceptions for rape and incest. The only exemption is if it’s needed because pregnancy seriously threatens the pregnant patient’s health. "As I said the day Dobbs was decided, bedrock constitutional principles dictate that women who reside in states that have banned access to comprehensive reproductive care must remain free to seek that care in states where it is legal," Attorney General Merrick B. Garland said in a statement. The Justice Department asked a federal judge to consider its view as he decides the issue. Marshall indicated he welcomed the fight. "Attorney General Marshall is prepared to defend our pro-life laws against this most recent challenge by the Biden Administration and, as always, welcomes the opportunity," Marshall’s office said in a statement Thursday evening. The legal dispute in Alabama comes as several Texas counties have enacted ordinances, which would be enforced through private lawsuits, seeking to block travel on local roads to get to where abortion is legal. The measures would not punish women who are seeking an abortion but would present legal risks to people who help transport them to get the procedure. The two Alabama lawsuits seek a ruling clarifying that people and groups can assist women leaving the state for an abortion. One lawsuit was filed by the Yellowhammer Fund, a group that stopped providing financial assistance to low-income abortion patients because of prosecution concerns. The other was filed by an obstetrician and two former abortion clinics that continue to provide contraception and other health services.





Article: 35
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Supreme Court preserves full access to medical abortion pill mifepristone
Author:  Chris Pandolfo , Adam Sabes , Shannon Bream , Bill Mears 
Publication_Date: Published April 21, 2023 6:48pm EDT Updated April 21, 2023 7:40pm EDT
Article_Content:  The SCOTUS decision gives a temporary victory to the Biden administration Jonathan Turley: SCOTUS has 'maddening decision to make' on abortion bill Fox News contributor Jonathan Turley provides legal insight on the Supreme Court extending access to the abortion pill mifepristone on 'The Story with Martha MacCallum.' After delaying its decision earlier this week, the Supreme Court on Friday ruled that full access to the abortion pill mifepristone can continue as a lawsuit works its way through the lower federal courts. Mifepristone was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2000, and its use has been deregulated in recent years. Under President Biden, the FDA made abortion pills more widely available at retail pharmacies, including delivery by mail.  The ruling by the Supreme Court gives a victory to the Biden administration and supporters of abortion rights, but the Supreme Court will likely be asked to revisit the issue later this year. The Supreme Court The Supreme Court with a carving of Justice in the foreground April 19, 2023, in Washington.  The case challenging the FDA's approval of mifepristone, brought by pro-life doctors and medical groups, is the first abortion controversy to be heard by the Supreme Court since the Republican-appointed majority overturned Roe v. Wade 10 months ago and permitted more than a dozen states to effectively ban abortion outright. In that decision, Justice Samuel A. Alito, Jr. said abortion policy should be a question for lawmakers to consider, not courts.  "It is time to heed the Constitution and return the issue of abortion to the people’s elected representatives," Alito wrote. In this case, the issue is not abortion pills directly, but whether the FDA acted appropriately in approving the drug more than 20 years ago. The Alliance Defending Freedom, which represents the pro-life plaintiffs, alleges the FDA "chose politics over science" in approving the drug and acted unlawfully by removing safeguards around mifepristone, including permitting the pill to be delivered by mail. A woman holds the first of two combination pills, mifepristone, which will induce an abortion A patient prepares to take the first of two combination pills, mifepristone, for a medication abortion during a visit to a clinic in Kansas City, Kan., Oct. 12, 2022.  The Biden administration and Danco Laboratories, the drug's manufacturer, counter that mifepristone has been repeatedly found to be safe and effective by FDA's expert review process. In over two decades since it was first approved, the drug has been used by more than 5 million women to terminate pregnancies.  The case reached the Supreme Court after Trump-appointed U.S. District Judge Matthew J. Kacsmaryk issued a highly controversial ruling siding with the pro-life groups and halting FDA approval for mifepristone. His order was partially overturned by the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, but the appeals court preserved restrictions that made the drug available only to be dispensed up to seven weeks, not 10, and not by mail. The Justice Department argued that allowing restrictions to mifepristone imposed by the lower courts to remain in place would cause chaos. Complicating the matter, a federal judge in Washington has ordered the FDA to preserve access to mifepristone under the current rules in response to a separate lawsuit brought by 17 Democratic-led states and the District of Columbia.  Supreme Court to possibly make abortion pill rulingVideo The Biden administration has said the rulings conflict and create an untenable situation for the FDA.  In a new development, the generic abortion pill maker GenBioPro Inc. filed a lawsuit against the FDA Wednesday to keep mifepristone available on the market amid the other ongoing legal challenges.  Mifepristone is taken with misoprostol in a two-drug regimen that first blocks hormones needed to keep an unborn baby alive and then causes cramps and contractions to expel the dead fetus from the mother's womb.  The drug is 97% effective in terminating early pregnancy, though approximately 3% of women who take it will "require surgical intervention for ongoing pregnancy, heavy bleeding, incomplete expulsion or other reasons such as patient request," according to the manufacturer. 





Article: 36
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Trump says he would reach abortion 'deal' that the 'whole country can agree with'
Author:  Julia Musto
Publication_Date: Published May 18, 2023 9:01am EDT
Article_Content: The former president also continued his attack on Florida Gov Ron DeSantis Trump being found liable for battery, sexual assault ‘won’t stop him’ from winning GOP primary: Susan Ferrechio
Washington Times staff writer Susan Ferrechio and Fox News White House correspondent Kevin Corke say voters care more about ‘pocketbook’ issues than legal issues when choosing their candidate. Former President Trump claimed Tuesday that his potential future administration would reach a deal on abortion that "the whole country" would be okay with. "Now DeSantis, or Ron DeSanctimonious as I call him, he came out with the six weeks. Other people agree with it. And a lot of people don't," Trump said in an interview with Newsmax. "We're in a position now – and I'm going to be leading the charge – we're in the position now where we can get something that the whole country can agree with, and that's only because I got us out of the Roe v. Wade where the pro-life people had absolutely nothing to say." When pressed further, the GOP presidential candidate asserted that he is in a "very powerful negotiating position" following the reversal of Roe v. Wade, echoing previous statements when asked about his beliefs.  "But on pro-life, I will tell you what I did on Roe v. Wade, nobody else, for 50 years they've been trying to do it. I got it done. And now we're in a position to make a really great deal, and a deal that people want," Trump concluded.  Trump at a podium
Former President Trump speaks at a campaign rally on April 27, 2023, in Manchester, New Hampshire.This comes after Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis – a rumored 2024 challenger – hit at Trump on Tuesday during a press conference and bill signing. "Protecting an unborn child when there’s a detectable heartbeat is something that almost 99% of pro-lifers support," he told reporters. "It’s something that other states like Iowa, under Gov. Kim Reynolds, have enacted." "As a Florida resident, you know, he didn’t give an answer about, ‘Would you have signed the heartbeat bill that Florida did, that had all the exceptions that people talk about?’" DeSantis pointed out. Trump attacked DeSantis on the topic just a day earlier, suggesting that the Sunshine State's six-week restriction is "too harsh."  Ron DeSantis speaking Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis speaks during the annual Feenstra Family Picnic at the Dean Family Classic Car Museum in Sioux Center, Iowa, on Saturday, May 13, 2023.  "He has to do what he has to do," he reportedly told The Messenger on Monday. "If you look at what DeSantis did, a lot of people don't even know if he knew what he was doing. But he signed six weeks, and many people within the pro-life movement feel that that was too harsh." When asked about whether he would support restrictions on abortions after six weeks of pregnancy, Trump replied, "I'm looking at all options." DeSantis's abortion bill, signed in mid-April, bans most abortions beyond six weeks but includes exceptions for rape and incest. Existing state exceptions for the life of the mother also remain in place. Nikki Haley Republican presidential candidate and former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley speaks at a town hall event in New Hampshire on April 26, 2023, in Bedford, New Hampshire.  How exactly Trump would reach a resolution "the whole country" could agree with was not made clear.  On Monday, Republican presidential candidate Nikki Haley told CBS News she would not pledge to push for federal rules on abortion because it is an "unrealistic" goal for the next president and that promising progress with Congress on this controversial issue is not being "honest" with the American people.  "For a national standard, I think we have to tell the American people the truth," she said. "In order to do a national standard, you'd have to have a majority of the House, 60 Senate votes, and a president. We haven't had 60 pro-life senators in 100 years," she said. A national poll of registered voters released in the summer of last year found 61% were against the demise of Roe, and 35% of voters supported the reversal.





Article: 37
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Trump blasted online after attack on DeSantis' abortion ban: 'A terrible thing'
Author:  Houston Keene
Publication_Date: Published September 18, 2023 6:03pm EDT
Article_Content: 'I think what he did is a terrible thing and a terrible mistake,' the former president said New Hampshire's secretary of state won’t block former President Donald Trump from ballot in the key presidential primary state New Hampshire Secretary of State Dave Scanlan shuts down the push by some Republicans in the crucial early voting presidential primary state to keep former President Donald Trump off the ballot. Former President Donald Trump sparked backlash from conservatives after he criticized the six-week abortion ban of his Republican opponent, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis. During an interview on MSNBC's "Meet the Press" over the weekend, Trump was pressed on his abortion stance as voters turn their attention toward the 2024 presidential election. Trump, the frontrunner of the GOP primary, said that he would work with Democrats to pass abortion legislation before taking aim at his presidential race rival DeSantis' six-week ban in the Sunshine State. Former President Donald Trump Former President Donald Trump blasted Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis' six-week abortion ban, calling the policy "a terrible thing." (Sean Rayford/Getty Images) "I think they're all going to like me, I think both sides are going to like me," Trump said. "…What's going to happen is: you're going to come up with a number of weeks or months, you're going to come up with a number that's going to make people happy." "Because 92 percent of the Democrats don't want to see abortion after a certain period of time," the former president added. Trump was pressed on whether he would sign a 15-week federal abortion ban if it came across his desk. "Well, people are starting to think of 15 weeks, that seems to be a number that people are talking about right now," he responded, being asked again if he would sign it. Republican presidential candidate Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis Trump, the frontrunner of the GOP primary, said that he would work with Democrats to pass abortion legislation before taking aim at his presidential race rival DeSantis' six-week ban in the Sunshine State.  "I would sit down with both sides and I'd negotiate something, and we'll end up with peace on that issue for the first time in 52 years," the former president said. "I'm not going to say I would or I wouldn't." "I mean, ‘DeSanctus’ [DeSantis] is willing to sign a five-week and six-week ban," Trump said in response to whether he would support that level of ban and if he thought it goes too far. "I think what he did is a terrible thing and a terrible mistake," the former president responded. Trump's campaign did not immediately respond to Fox News Digital's request for comment. DeSantis and Trump split image Trump's comments come as he seeks a third candidacy for the Oval Office against his former protégé DeSantis and a multitude of GOP and Democratic presidential hopefuls. (Fox News) Users online blasted Trump over his comments, with conservatives saying the abortion issue may hurt him going into 2024. "Huh. That’s odd. I remember being in the crowd when Trump spoke at the March for Life," pro-life activist Nicholas Sandmann tweeted. "I commended the President for an amazing speech. He said: ‘We cannot know what our citizens yet unborn will achieve. The dreams they will imagine. The masterpieces they will create…" he continued. "Pathetic and unacceptable. Trump is actively attacking the very pro-life laws made possible by Roe’s overturning," pro-life activist Lila Rose wrote. "Heartbeat Laws have saved thousands of babies. But Trump wants to compromise on babies’ lives so pro-abort Dems ‘like him,’" she continued. "Trump should not be the GOP nominee." "Trump should fire whatever idiot advisor told him to go squishy on abortion. Dumb move. Abortion zealots are never gonna vote Trump just because he’s willing to 'compromise.' And innocent babies will be killed in the process," "The Liz Wheeler Show" host Liz Wheeler posted. "Lose lose. Trump isn’t a centrist. His best move is and always will be to stay based and savage. Hate to see this garbage from him." SBA Pro-Life America President Marjorie Dannenfelser responded to Trump's comments by saying, "We thank Gov. Ron DeSantis for following the science and the will of the people by signing the Heartbeat Protection Act into law" The former president's comments come as he seeks a third candidacy for the Oval Office against his onetime protégé DeSantis and a multitude of GOP and Democratic presidential hopefuls. DeSantis has been fighting to close the gap with Trump from his number two position in the GOP primary as former Vice President Mike Pence competes for the GOP presidential nomination as well. Former United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley and entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy are also fighting for the GOP nod and met DeSantis on the debate stage last month.




Article: 38
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Planned Parenthood announces return of abortion in Wisconsin after key court ruling
Author: Anders Hagstrom 
Publication_Date: Published September 14, 2023 2:35pm EDT
Article_Content: A Wisconsin judge ruled that a law banning the killing of fetuses doesn't apply to abortion Planned Parenthood will resume offering abortion services to women in Wisconsin following a key court ruling against existing abortion restrictions in the state. Planned Parenthood's clinics in Milwaukee and Madison had previously been forced to close due to the state government attempting to use an 1849 law to ban abortions. A state judge ruled that the law does not, in fact, apply to abortions, paving the way for providers to resume services. "With patients and community as our central priority and driving force, we are eager to resume abortion services and provide this essential care to people in our State," Tanya Atkinson, President and CEO of Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin, said in a Thursday statement.  "With the recent confirmation from the Court that there is not an enforceable abortion ban in Wisconsin, our staff can now provide the full scope of sexual and reproductive health care to anyone in Wisconsin who needs it, no matter what," she continued. Planned Parenthood clinic in Baltimore Maryland Planned Parenthood will resume offering abortion services to women in Wisconsin following a key court ruling against existing abortion restrictions in the state. (Google Maps) Abortions will resume at the pair of Wisconsin clinics on Monday. The 1849 law in question bans the killing of fetuses, something that Republican leaders in the state argued applied to abortion. Dane County Circuit Judge Diane Schlipper disagreed, however, ruling this summer that "consensual medical abortions" do not constitute killing a fetus. Instead, Schlipper interpreted the law to ban an intentional attack on a mother with the goal of killing a fetus. "There is no such thing as an ‘1849 Abortion Ban’ in Wisconsin," she wrote in her ruling. The Wisconsin state Capitol building A Wisconsin judge ruled against pro-life groups this summer, allowing abortion clinics in Milwaukee and the state capital of Madison to reopen. Democratic Wisconsin Governor Tony Evers had attempted to overturn the 1849 ban via a repeal bill, but the Republican-held legislature refused to take up the legislation.



Article: 39
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Ohio abortion vote this November considered 2024 presidential bellwether by Democrats, Republicans
Author: Danielle Wallace 
Publication_Date: Published July 26, 2023 3:01pm EDT
Article_Content: Ohio abortion vote viewed as 2024 litmus test a year after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v Wade
Democrats and Republicans alike reportedly consider an Ohio abortion vote scheduled this November a bellwether issue ahead of the 2024 presidential election. 
Ohio voters will decide this fall whether the right to an abortion should be added to the state constitution, after officials said Tuesday that enough signatures were gathered to get the proposal on the ballot. However, it's an open question how much support the amendment will need to pass, as Republican lawmakers have set a special election next month on whether to raise the threshold from a simple majority to 60%. The state vote a year after Roe v Wade was overturned will likely be viewed on the national level as a litmus test on the abortion issue ahead of the 2024 election. "Seeing this level of enthusiasm in Ohio shows that this is going to be a salient issue and is an issue that is top of mind for voters no matter where they live," Ryan Stitzlein, vice president of political and government relations at NARAL-Pro Choice America, told The Hill.  Pro-abortion counter-protesters in Toledo, Ohio Counterprotesters hold placards in favor of abortion in Toledo, Ohio, disrupting a pro-life prayer circle last year. Stitzlein pointed to a new USA Today Network/Suffolk University poll of 500 likely voters in Ohio that found the amendment guaranteeing access to reproductive services backed by a double-digit margin, 58%-32%. "It’s another data point in what we have seen since the Dobbs ruling last June, is that the decision by the Supreme Court and the subsequent actions that Republican, anti-abortion lawmakers have been making are totally out of step with the American people," Stitzlein said. Pro-life activists in Ohio argued the survey does not tell the full story of what's happening on the ground in the Buckeye State. "In November, voters will look more closely at the proposed amendment and see that it covers more than just abortion by its own language," Mark Weaver, an Ohio-based GOP strategist, told The Hill. "The poll doesn’t ask them that." The Ohio measure would establish "a fundamental right to reproductive freedom" with "reasonable limits." In language similar to a constitutional amendment that Michigan voters approved last November, it would require restrictions imposed past a fetus’ viability outside the womb – which was the standard under Roe v. Wade – to be based on evidence of patient health and safety benefits, according to The Associated Press. The proposed amendment states that "every individual has a right to make and carry out one’s own reproductive decisions, including but not limited to decisions on contraception, fertility treatment, continuing one’s own pregnancy, miscarriage care, and abortion." Ohio pro-abortion protester holds a sign that claims abortion saves lives Protesters rally in Dayton, Ohio, last year in response to the leaked Supreme Court decision that would later overturn Roe v. Wade. "Nowhere in the entire amendment does the word ‘woman’ appear," Amy Natoce, press secretary at Protect Women Ohio, a pro-life coalition, told The Hill. "The word ‘adult’ is not used anywhere. There is no mention whatsoever of age restrictions. Instead, the ACLU and its attorneys who wrote the amendment intentionally chose the very broad word ‘individuals.’" Protect Women Ohio has committed $25 million in ads in opposition of the amendment. One of the advertisements released in May includes video of President Biden stating, "There’s no such thing as someone else’s child" and ends with the slogan, "They’re coming for your parental rights." The group has argued that the broad language of the amendment could eliminate parental consent for abortions and transgender surgeries for minors.  Secretary of State Frank LaRose determined Tuesday that Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights submitted nearly 496,000 valid signatures, comfortably enough to put the amendment before voters on Nov. 7. The coalition had submitted more than 700,000 signatures. Ohio ballots delivery Boxes of signatures are delivered to Republican Ohio Secretary of State Frank LaRose's office in downtown Columbus, Ohio, July 5, 2023. (AP Photo/Patrick Orsagos) The Aug. 8 special election called by Statehouse Republicans would also eliminate the 10-day curing period when citizen-led campaigns may submit additional signatures if they fall short the first time, and increase the number of counties where signatures must be collected from 44 to all 88. But those provisions would come too late to impact the abortion issue, which has already faced both legal and administrative hurdles to now be poised for a vote. "They want to prevent Ohioans from being able to vote on reproductive freedom because they are seeing what we are seeing, which is a majority of Ohioans are saying they will vote yes on reproductive freedom in November," Lauren Blauvelt, vice president of government affairs and public advocacy at Planned Parenthood Advocates of Ohio, told The Hill. Abortion remains legal in the state up to 20 weeks’ gestation, under a judge’s order issued in a lawsuit challenging legislation that would restrict abortion once a fetal heartbeat can be detected, or around six weeks into pregnancy. Ohio Attorney General Dave Yost, a Republican, has asked the state Supreme Court to overturn the stay.




Article: 40
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Biden admits he’s ‘not big on abortion,’ says terminations in ‘last 3 months have to be negotiated’
Author:   Timothy H.J. Nerozzi
Publication_Date: Published June 29, 2023 8:49am EDT 
Article_Content: President Biden claimed that the right to abortion on demand ends during the last 3 months of pregnancy President Biden told a crowd that he is personally not a supporter of abortion and that termination procedures in the last three months are not clear-cut. Biden, speaking to a crowd in Maryland on Tuesday, claimed that his relationship to Catholicism makes him personally uncomfortable with abortion — but that Roe v. Wade "got it right." "So I’m, you know, I happen to be a practicing Catholic. I’m not big on abortion. But guess what? Roe v. Wade got it right," Biden said.  Biden Maryland President Biden arrives to board Air Force One at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland on June 28, 2023. "Roe v. Wade cut in a place where the vast majority of religions have reached an agreement. Historically, the first three months or thereabouts, in all major religions, was: That’s between a woman and her doctor," Biden said. However, the president strayed from the hard-line pro-choice movement with a rare assertion that the universal right to terminate the unborn child ends in "the last three months." "The next three months is between, I mean, just a woman and her family," Biden continued. "Next three months is between a woman and her doctor. The last three months have to be negotiated, because you can’t — unless you are in a position where your physical health is at stake you can’t do it." President Biden speaks with reporters President Biden speaks to reporters outside the White House. (Fox News) Biden has repeatedly tried to square the circle of his Catholic faith and political endorsement of abortion rights. The president has claimed for years that his political support for legalized abortion, coupled with his personal disagreement with the practice, is in line with Catholic moral teaching. He has been refuted by Catholic laity and leadership at every rung of the hierarchy — including the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops and even the pontiff himself. Last year, Pope Francis was interviewed by Univision and was questioned about Biden's seemingly contradictory beliefs. Pope Francis Pope Francis blesses the faithful at the end of his weekly general audience in St. Peter's Square at the Vatican. When asked about Biden's abortion policy, the Pope dismissed the president as incomprehensible.  "I leave it to [President Biden's] conscience and that he speaks to his bishop, his pastor, his parish priest about that incoherence," the pope said in the 2022 interview. According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church, "Human life must be respected and protected absolutely from the moment of conception. From the first moment of his existence, a human being must be recognized as having the rights of a person - among which is the inviolable right of every innocent being to life." Biden church President Biden leaves St. Edmund's Roman Catholic Church after attending Mass in Rehoboth Beach, Delaware, June 17, 2023. The church's doctrine continues, "Since the first century the Church has affirmed the moral evil of every procured abortion. This teaching has not changed and remains unchangeable. Direct abortion, that is to say, abortion willed either as an end or a means, is gravely contrary to the moral law." Biden picked up endorsements from three major abortion rights groups last week, a day before the anniversary of the Supreme Court overturning Roe v. Wade. Planned Parenthood Action Fund, NARAL Pro-Choice America and EMILY'S List are throwing their support behind Biden, as Democrats nationally have claimed several victories for abortion rights on ballot referendums or in courts and will press forward on the issue into the 2024 election. Planned Parenthood signage Planned Parenthood clinic in Inglewood, California  "There is so much at stake," Alexis McGill Johnson, president and CEO of the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, said in a statement to media outlets. "We know, clear as day, that if anti-abortion politicians gain control of the White House, they will exploit their power toward their ultimate goal: a national abortion ban." Among the top four contenders thus far in the 2024 presidential election, three claim to follow the Catholic faith — Biden, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis and Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. 



Article: 41
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Nebraska mom pleads guilty to helping daughter, 17, obtain illegal abortion
Author:  Chris Pandolfo
Publication_Date: Published July 12, 2023 3:01pm EDT
Article_Content: Jessica Burgess admitted to providing an illegal abortion after 20 weeks of pregnancy, false reporting and tampering with human skeletal remains CNN's Jim Acosta pushes back against guest: Dems not for abortion until birth CNN anchor Jim Acosta defended Democrats against a pro-life guest on Sunday by insisting that they were not in favor of abortion until the moment of birth. A Nebraska mother pleaded guilty Friday to supplying her teen daughter with pills for an illegal abortion and helping to burn and bury the baby's remains.  In a plea deal, Jessica Burgess, 42, of Norfolk admitted to providing an abortion after 20 weeks of gestation, false reporting and tampering with human skeletal remains. Prosecutors agreed to drop charges of concealing the death of another person and abortion by someone other than a licensed physician.
Burgess is accused of assisting her then-17-year-old daughter Celeste Burgess with obtaining an abortion last year when medical records indicated she was more than 23 weeks pregnant — beyond the period during which the practice is legal. Madison County District Court documents show Burgess ordered abortion pills over the internet. After the teen aborted the 29-week-old fetus, the two burned the remains and buried them in a field north of Norfolk in northeastern Nebraska. Authorities later found the burned fetus. Abortion pills Boxes of the abortion drug mifepristone sit on a shelf at the West Alabama Women's Center in Tuscaloosa, Ala., March 16, 2022. (AP Photo/Allen G. Breed, File) State law enacted in 2010 makes abortion illegal after 20 weeks of pregnancy. Madison County Attorney Joe Smith said this is the first time he's charged anyone with performing an illegal abortion. In May, Republican Gov. Jim Pillen signed a new 12-week abortion ban.  Jessica Burgess is scheduled to be sentenced on Sept. 22, court documents show. She faces two felony counts and one misdemeanor.  Jim Pillen Republican Nebraska Gov. Jim Pillen in May signed a 12-week abortion ban into law. Her daughter Celeste Burgess, now 18, pleaded guilty in May to removing, concealing or abandoning a dead body. She was charged as an adult and faces up to two years in prison. Her sentencing hearing is on July 20. Investigators obtained Facebook messages that show the pair discussing how to abort the baby and destroy the evidence. The messages were acquired with a search warrant and detailed in court documents. Celeste Burgess wrote "about how she can't wait to get the ‘thing’ out of her body," court documents state. She also wrote "I will finally be able to wear jeans." Another message shows Jessica Burgess inform her daughter that she obtained abortion pills and gave instructions on how to take the pills to induce an abortion. 
Fox News' Shannon Bream on SCOTUS abortion pill case: 'Time is of the essence' The investigation of the case began in April 2022, after a Norfolk Police detective received a tip that Celeste had a miscarriage and buried the fetus with her mother, the Lincoln Journal-Star reported. The detective found the medical records indicating how far along the pregnancy had been, and that she had been due on July 3. He spoke to the Burgesses days later, and court records reportedly say they told him Celeste gave birth to a stillborn baby while she was showering. They reportedly said they then put the body in a bag, placed it in a van, and later buried it a few miles away with a 22-year-old man's help. They even showed the detective where the body was buried — on land owned by the man's parents. The man reportedly said that the women tried to burn the body first, which was consistent with the investigation's findings. At that point, the women were charged with the offenses of concealing the death and body, and false reporting. Not long after, however, the detective used a search warrant to access the women's Facebook accounts and found messages between the two of them indicating that Jessica Burgess got her daughter abortion pills, as well as directions for what to do with them. Last summer, the 22-year-old man pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor after he was accused of helping the two women bury the fetus. He was put on probation. 




Article: 42
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Catholics call for removal of 'abhorrent' pro-abortion ad over depiction of Jesus Christ
Author:  Andrew Mark Miller 
Publication_Date: Published September 15, 2023 5:06pm EDT
Article_Content: Ohioans will vote in November on a measure to enshrine abortion access into the state constitution Mom who refused abortion to receive chemotherapy: Killing my baby wouldnt take my cancer away Tasha Kann, who said doctors pressured her to get an abortion after her brain cancer diagnosis, sits down with her husband Taylor Kann to share their story of hope nearly one year after their daughter was born. A non-profit Catholic advocacy group is speaking out against an ad in Ohio supporting abortion that depicts an image of Jesus Christ and a man praying inside a church to promote "abortion rights." The ad in question, posted by Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights, includes a shot of a man kneeling and praying inside a Catholic Church with the Divine Mercy image of Christ in the background along with messaging supporting a November measure that would enshrine abortion access into the Ohio state constitution. "When we face personal medical decisions, we depend on our doctors, our faith, our family, and the last thing we want is the government making those decisions for us," the ad says. The ad has generated controversy and criticism from Catholics and opponents of abortion. Ohio Issue 1 ad Catholics are taking issue with a pro-abortion ad depicting a man praying in a Catholic Church (Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights) "Those who want to eliminate all protections for the unborn in Ohio have resorted to exploiting images of Jesus in order to impose a radical change to the Ohio constitution," CatholicVote president Brian Burch said in a statement in response to the ad.  "Their newest ad campaign features the Divine Mercy, a sacred image for Catholics given to a saintly polish nun in the early 20th century. The use of this image to advance the cause of abortion, even painful late term abortion, is abhorrent, and reveals a gross disregard for the cherished faith of millions of Christians in Ohio. We urge those responsible for this ad to remove it immediately and apologize for the great offense it has caused." In addition to outrage about the Catholic imagery, opponents of the ad say its misleading in other ways.  "The backers of Issue 1 stooped lower than anyone could have imagined with their ad, invoking faith and family, medical misinformation and fearmongering to distract from the dangers lurking within the proposed amendment," Amy Natoce, press secretary for Protect Women Ohio, told Fox News Digital about the ad.  "The ad fails to mention that Issue 1 will strip Ohio parents of their basic rights, permit abortion-on-demand through all nine months, including when the unborn child is capable of feeling pain, and remove commonsense health and safety protections for women. The ACLU pedaled the same lies in Michigan, and now they're coming for Ohio. Issue 1 is too radical for Ohio families and parents will not stand for it." In a statement to Fox News Digital, a spokesperson for Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights said, "When Ohioans face personal medical decisions, we depend on our doctors, our family, and our faith. Voting Yes on Issue 1 puts Ohioans back in charge of their families’ personal medical decisions and stops government from making these decisions for us."




Article: 43
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Leaked Veterans Affairs training video promotes abortion, suggests men can get pregnant
Author:  Lindsay Kornick
Publication_Date: Published September 20, 2023 9:05pm EDT
Article_Content: The Department of Veterans Affairs announced in 2022 that it would provide abortion-related services The Biden administration has an extreme abortion policy: Sen. Tommy Tuberville Sen. Tommy Tuberville, R-Ala., explains why he continues to block the Biden administrations military nominees from being confirmed on The Ingraham Angle. A leaked Department of Veteran Affairs video showed efforts to promote abortions and more "medically accurate" terminology such as "person who is pregnant" over pregnant women. A "Reproductive Health Training" video from April 2023 advised staffers on how to counsel veterans considering abortion. Before discussing counseling procedures, the video began with a "note" on language that clarified, "Not all people who seek abortions identify as women." Another note read, "’Person who is pregnant’ is inclusive and preferred to ‘pregnant woman.’" "When ‘women’ is used in this presentation series, it’s because the studies cited only included ciswomen," the video also stated. Abortion clinic The Department of Veterans Affairs came under fire in 2022 after announcing it would help provide abortion-related services to veterans and their family members. Another slide offered a "guide" to "language and abortion" to offer to veterans potentially seeking abortions. The language included using "embryo or fetus" instead of "baby or unborn child," "embryonic or fetal cardiac activity" instead of "fetal heartbeat," "veteran or person" instead of "mother" and "pregnancy options counseling" instead of "abortion counseling." Additional videos obtained by The Post Millennial showed what appeared to be defenses for abortion as "essential, life-saving care" and safer than pregnancy. The videos also suggested that "pregnancy can endanger mental health" while abortion patients "rarely" feel regret. In a statement to FOX News Digital, CatholicVote President Brian Burch said, "The Biden Administration’s Department of Veterans Affairs has shamelessly weaponized the U.S. military to advance a radical pro-abortion agenda that has no place infecting our defense agencies. CatholicVote has spent the past several months demanding that the VA stop holding military appointments hostage with its illegal, unconstitutional policy to fund abortion and abortion-related expenses for service members and their families, while expressing concern over the agency’s increasingly overt political bias." Senator Tommy Tuberville at Senate HELP Committee hearing Senator Tommy Tuberville, a Republican from Alabama, has blocked Biden administration's Department of Defense nominees out of protest for their abortion policies. ( Al Drago/Bloomberg via Getty Images) "Today our worst fears were confirmed by the VA’s outrageous training video that unapologetically encourages and glorifies abortion, implies pregnancy is a dangerous medical condition, and suggests that abortion is always safer than childbirth," Burch continued. "The video is an insult to women everywhere, not only because it utterly denies biology in claiming men can get pregnant, but also because it adds insult to injury in claiming pregnancy is nothing to be celebrated or congratulated. Such outrageous and offensive pro-abortion propaganda coming from a government agency tasked with protecting American lives is a deeply disturbing sign of the times imposed by this radical administration." Susan B. Anthony President Marjorie Dannenfelser also commented on the video saying, "Americans will be shocked to learn that, not only is the VA performing abortions at hospitals across the county, but they are promoting and training their staff with radical pro-abortion ideology, counseling women veterans into having abortions. Most Americans don't want their taxpayer dollars funding abortions, especially in direct violation of the law." "Senator [Tommy] Tuberville and Rep. Michael Cloud should be applauded for exposing that the VA has opened the door to abortion on demand," she continued. "And for leading Congressional efforts to stop this illegal agenda. Right now, the VA is instructing its staff to completely sidestep state pro-life laws and provide abortions. We must continue to expose and stop this illegal extremism. At a time when our veterans need our greatest support, why is the VA prioritizing forced ideology over the needs of our ill, injured and wounded veterans?" In addition to his resolution with Cloud against the VA's abortion policy, Tuberville has blocked hundreds of military appointments in response to the Pentagon's policy to provide abortions to service members. Veteran affairs logo The Department of Veterans Affairs did not respond for a comment. (Michael Siluk/UCG/Universal Images Group via Getty Images) The Department of Veterans Affairs did not immediately respond for comment. This leak came more than a year after the department announced that it would begin providing abortion services for veterans and their dependents through the taxpayer-funded VA health care system. This would include states where abortions are restricted or outlawed. "This is a patient safety decision," Denis McDonough, secretary of Veterans Affairs, said in a statement at the time. "Pregnant Veterans and VA beneficiaries deserve to have access to world-class reproductive care when they need it most. That’s what our nation owes them, and that’s what we at VA will deliver."





Article: 44
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Ohio abortion amendment is an attack on parental rights, pro-life groups say as initiative clears key hurdle
Author:  Jessica Chasmar
Publication_Date: Published July 5, 2023 4:35pm EDT
Article_Content: Ohio amendment, drafted by ACLU, would enshrine abortion rights in state constitution GOP 'burden' in 2024 will be navigating the issue of abortion: Noelle Nikpour GOP strategist and fundraiser Noelle Nikpour joins Fox News' Arthel Neville to break down how the issues of abortion and the economy will shape the 2024 presidential election on 'Fox News Live.' A proposed amendment that would enshrine abortion rights in Ohio’s constitution is being decried as an attack on parental rights by prominent pro-life groups. The amendment, which was drafted by the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) of Ohio, declares that "every individual has the right to make and carry out one’s own reproductive decisions" on contraception, fertility treatment, continuing one’s own pregnancy, miscarriage care and abortion. A coalition of pro-abortion groups submitted the required number of signatures Wednesday to get the amendment on the ballot in November. State officials must now review the signatures for potential errors before voters can decide on it. "This amendment is dangerous for the women and children of Ohio," Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, said in a statement. "It removes parents from some of their minor children’s most important health decisions such as parental notification before an abortion. It would eliminate basic health and safety standards for women. And it would permit late term abortion after the baby can feel pain and even right up until birth." A girl holds a sign reading "Leave Us Alone" A girl holds a sign outside a school board meeting on gender issues, June 20, 2023, in Glendale, California. "This amendment is too extreme for Ohio," said Logan Church, director of CatholicVote Ohio. "As part of its unrelenting attack on parents, the ACLU’s proposed amendment seeks to cut parents out of their child’s most important and life-altering health decisions – including abortions and sex change operations." "On top of that, the amendment would nullify existing and future health and safety protection for women and permit abortions in Ohio through all nine months of pregnancy, well after the point at which the unborn child can feel pain," Church added. Anti-abortion activists Activists participate in a Celebrate Life Day rally at the Lincoln Memorial on June 24, 2023, in Washington, D.C. The amendment doesn’t mention sex-change operations, but critics argue that its "loosely defined" language, which prohibits any law that "directly or indirectly" would "burden" or interfere" with "reproductive decisions," would leave parents out of the conversation if their child chooses to pursue an abortion or sex change surgery.  Protect Women Ohio (PWO), which is leading the fight against the amendment, points to comments made in February by Jessie Hill, an attorney for the ACLU of Ohio, who told local media that conflicting laws "should not be enforced," as evidence of the organization's offensive position regarding parental rights.  "When you pass a constitutional amendment, it doesn't just automatically erase everything and start over," Hill said. "But it would mean that laws that conflict with it cannot be enforced, should not be enforced." Abortion protestors stand with signs during daytime in Dayton, Ohio Protesters hold placards at a pro-choice rally in Dayton, Ohio, on May 14, 2023. PWO spokesperson Amy Natoce accused the ACLU and pro-abortion groups of deceptively collecting the signatures needed to get on the ballot. "The ACLU’s extreme anti-parent amendment is so unpopular that they couldn’t even rely on grassroots support to collect signatures," Natoce said. "The ACLU paid out-of-state signature collectors to lie to Ohioans about their dangerous amendment that will strip parents of their rights, permit minors to undergo sex change operations without their parents’ knowledge or consent, and allow painful abortion on demand through all nine months. The ACLU’s attempts to hijack Ohio’s constitution to further its own radical agenda would be pathetic if it wasn’t so dangerous." ACLU Ohio did not respond to Fox News Digital’s request for comment.




Article: 45
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Biden administration 'hijacking' George Bush AIDS program to push abortion in Africa: GOP congressman
Author:  Andrew Mark Miller
Publication_Date: Published June 10, 2023 8:00am EDT
Article_Content: The PEPFAR program was created in 2003 under President George W. Bush FIRST ON FOX: A Republican congressman is sounding the alarm on what he says is a plan by the Biden administration to "hijack" former President Bush’s successful program delivering AIDS relief to Africa to promote its abortion agenda on the continent. "President Biden has hijacked PEPFAR, the $6 billion a year foreign aid program designed to mitigate HIV/AIDS in many targeted — mostly African — countries in order to promote abortion on demand," New Jersey Republican Rep. Chris Smith, wrote in a letter to his colleagues on Capitol Hill this week. Smith is the prime sponsor of a 2018 bill enacted into law to reauthorize PEPFAR for five more years. PEPFAR, the United States President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, was launched in 2003 under President George W. Bush and has invested over $100 billion fighting AIDS across the world while saving 25 million lives and preventing millions of infections, the State Department says. PEPFAR is up for re-authorization in Congress this year. Smith says two groups, Population Services International (PSI) and Village Reach, have received $96.5 million and $10.1 million, respectively, over the last few years from PEPFAR under Biden, and both groups have a track record of pushing abortion. Jill Biden at AIDs relief event U.S. first lady Jill Biden, right, speaks with participants in two different programs funded through the United States President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief at the Hope Initiative Southern Africa in Windhoek Feb. 23, 2023.  "PSI proudly proclaims it provides abortion and lobbies to eliminate pro-life laws," Smith wrote. "PSI provides comprehensive abortion and post-abortion care services in nearly 20 countries throughout the world." Smith alleges Village Reach used PEPFAR funds "to promote abortion in Malawi and lobby for changes in pro-life laws" and also "helped Malawi establish a government-funded hotline (that included providing information and referrals for ‘sexual and reproductive health,’ i.e., abortion). "Village Reach and Planned Parenthood used PEPFAR funding through the DREAMS Innovation Challenge to create a manual containing a whole module on ‘unsafe abortion and young people,’" Smith wrote. "Items covered include the need to change pro-life laws to provide "services that young people need." Village Reach added that it "provides no counsel or abortion services." A third group, Pathfinder International, has received $5 million in PEPFAR funding since Biden took office. Smith says the group "lobbies to weaken or eliminate pro-life laws in nations around the world" and is "explicit in its promotion of abortion in other countries, stating it is "committed to expanding access to … safe abortion." According to Smith, this NGO funding represents the track that the Biden administration is trying to take PEPFAR down as evidenced by a 2022 document titled "Reimagining PEPFAR’s Strategic Direction."   Smith says the document "makes absolutely clear that the new direction of the program includes integrating PEPFAR with abortion promotion." Twice in the document, commitments to "reproductive health rights and services" are listed under the section of "strategic pillars." In PEPFAR's Regional Operational Plan Guidance for 2023, it states that PEPFAR works with "organizations advocating for structural, systemic, and institutional reforms in law and policy regarding sexual, reproductive, and economic rights of women." "They want to change the laws in these countries," Smith told Fox News Digital. "That's not what PEPFAR was originally intended to do. He [Biden] has radically changed the trajectory of PEPFAR." Smith isn’t the only critic who has expressed concerns over PEPFAR’s ties to abortion activism under the Biden administration. In May, the Daily Caller reported about a letter sent by 31 conservative and pro-life groups calling on legislators to block any possibility of abortion funding through PEPFAR. AIDS activist Steve Pieters shares his story of healing and hope "We are concerned that grants from the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) are used by nongovernmental organizations that promote abortions and push a radical gender ideology abroad. We urge you to ensure that any reauthorization of PEPFAR ensures that taxpayer money is not used for such purposes," the letter, signed by groups like The Heritage Foundation and Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, said.  Additionally, a group of 139 African parliamentarians sent a letter to Congress Tuesday to express "concerns and suspicions that this funding is supporting so-called family planning and reproductive health principles and practices, including abortion, that violate our core beliefs concerning life, family, and religion." "Polling consistently shows that an overwhelming majority of Americans — nearly 8 in 10 — oppose taxpayer funding of abortion in other countries, and the vast majority of African countries categorically reject the abortion culture that the Biden administration brazenly promotes," Smith told Fox News Digital. Blinken speaks at PEPFAR event Secretary of State Antony Blinken delivers remarks at a World AIDS Day Reception at the Hay Adams Hotel Dec. 2, 2022, in Washington, D.C. "Congress must ensure that any multi-year PEPFAR reauthorizing legislation prevents this noble foreign aid program — designed to care for those who are ill and tangibly assist women and children — from being used to poison, starve or dismember unborn children to death."  In a statement, Village Reach called Smith's characterization "inaccurate" and said the group received a DREAMS Innovative Challenge award for $1.3 million in 2016 and implemented the program between October and November 2018.  "What we delivered complied with U.S. law and Malawi law," the statement said. "We are proud of our work and how it delivers on our mission to transform health care delivery to reach everyone." In a statement to Fox News Digital, PSI called Smith's letter "erroneous." "PSI's safe abortion work remains separate from U.S. Government funding due to long-standing U.S. laws and regulations," the statement said. "No programs implemented by PSI with funding from PEPFAR …  or USAID (United States Agency for International Development) or any other U.S. Government entity include abortion services." Simon Ateba on why Africans do not want to be climate change testing ground A White House spokesperson told Fox News Digital PEPFAR funding "does not support" abortion provisions in accordance with "longstanding legal restrictions on the use of foreign assistance funding for abortions." The official explained that the "false narrative" on abortion was a "disinformation campaign" spread by groups that oppose the reauthorization of PEPFAR, which has enjoyed bipartisan support for 20 years. The official said the White House is "confident" PEPFAR will be reauthorized on a bipartisan basis. Smith told Fox News Digital the White House is engaging in "misdirection" given that Biden rescinded the Mexico City Policy, which prevented nonprofits from using federal funding to promote abortion, and that the Helms Amendment doesn't adequately prevent these organizations from promoting abortion. "I am sickened at heart that Biden is so wedded to and obsessed with promoting abortion that he would undermine the consensus that exists for this PEPFAR program, which is a great program. But it's been diverted to promote the killing of unborn baby girls and boys," Smith said.



Article: 46
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Court suspends federal grant policy for abortion providers in Ohio
Author: Associated Press 
Publication_Date: Published December 1, 2023 8:03pm EST 
Article_Content: Policy reportedly led to OH receiving 20% fewer federal family planning dollars A federal appeals court has paused enforcement of a federal government regulation that allows abortion providers to receive federal family planning money — but only in Ohio, where state health officials said the policy took money away from them. Since 1981, federal policy has changed several times regarding whether programs receiving family planning funds can provide abortions or refer patients to such services. Soon after President Joe Biden took office in 2021, the administration made rules to allow groups with abortion services to receive the funding again. A dozen states with Republican attorneys general challenged the rule. A U.S. District Court judge ruled last year that the Biden administration's version of the rules could remain in effect while the challenge moves through the court system. A majority of the three-judge panel from the Cincinnati-based 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals overruled that in a decision Thursday — but only as it applies to how the federal government distributes the grants in Ohio. The majority judges — Joan Larsen and Amul Thapar, both nominated by Republican former President Donald Trump — said that Ohio was the only state that demonstrated it had suffered irreparable harm from the policy. The state health department said it was receiving 20% less in federal family planning funding under the current policy that it did under the regulation that was in place previously. Abortion on the ballot in Ohio on Election Day 2023 People gather in the parking lot of the Hamilton County Board of Elections as people arrive for early in-person voting, in Cincinnati, Thursday, Nov. 2, 2023. The judges said that's because when referrals were banned, Planned Parenthood of Greater Ohio did not apply for funding. When the referrals were again allowed, the group, which also provides abortions, returned. And when that happened, the award to the state's health department decreased by $1.8 million. Ohio Attorney General Dave Yost said the result could be that the state’s Planned Parenthood affiliate might need to make changes or risk losing funding. A third judge, Karen Nelson Moore, who was nominated by former Democratic President Bill Clinton, dissented, saying her colleagues misunderstand the regulations. The bigger case remains in the court system. The abortion landscape has changed drastically since the lawsuit was initially filed. Last year, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned its landmark 1973 Roe v. Wade decision that established a nationwide right to abortion. Since then, most Republican-controlled states, including most of those challenging the Biden administration policy, have enacted bans or strict limits. Ohio adopted a ban on abortion after cardiac activity can be detected, about six weeks into pregnancy, which is often before women know they're pregnant. But a court blocked enforcement, and voters last month adopted an amendment to the state constitution enshrining the right to abortion.






Article: 47
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Massachusetts Democrat told to step down after abortion comments leave parents irate
Author:  Kassy Dillon
Publication_Date: Published February 24, 2023 4:30am EST
Article_Content: 'This is eugenics in 2023 America,' says Students for Life President Kristan Hawkins A local democratic official in Framingham, Massachusetts is under fire for comments made about babies born with disabilities who need access to special education. FRAMINGHAM, Mass. – A local Democrat official in Massachusetts is facing calls to step down after complaining about the cost of special education for children with disabilities who are not aborted. Michael Hugo, the chair of the Framingham Democratic Committee, made the remarks during a city council meeting when discussing a proclamation about access to abortion and crisis pregnancy centers in the city. He said crisis pregnancy centers could misdiagnose a defect in a baby in the womb, leading to them being born and becoming a strain on a school budget. He issued a public apology after 10 days of backlash from members of his own party and parents of special needs children. "I saw what Michael had said as a personal attack against my own children," said Sheryl Goldstein, the chair of the Framingham Disabilities Commission. "That my children who had special needs were not worth the expense in the school system." Massachusetts Democrat told to resign after abortion remarks leave parents irate In his public apology letter, Hugo called his comments "offensive and hurtful." "I am writing to offer my most sincere and humble apology to members of the Framingham Democratic Committee, but more especially my fellow members of Framingham's disability family community, for comments that I made at the last City Council meeting which were offensive and hurtful," he wrote. He said members of the committee did not "see or review" his remarks despite being sent out the night before the meeting. "Our fear is that if an unqualified sonographer misdiagnoses a heart defect, an organ defect, spina bifida or an encephalopathic defect that becomes a very local issue because our school budget will have to absorb the cost of a child in special education, supplying lots and lots of special services to children, who were born with the defect," Hugo said at the Feb. 7 meeting. Laura Green, a disability advocate in Framingham told Fox News that she does not accept his apology. "I feel that it was generic and lackluster. I feel like after a statement like that is made, you can’t just pretend that it didn't happen or take it back because it's damaging to a community of people," she said. "The disability community is the only minority group that you can become a part of at any time." An ultrasound of a five month old unborn baby. Crisis pregnancy centers provide ultrasounds to pregnant women for little to no cost. According to his LinkedIn, Hugo is also the director of policy and government affairs for the Massachusetts Association of Health Boards. Jon Fetherston, a special needs advocate and registered Republican said he was in disbelief when he heard the comments. "As a parent of an autistic child, I read those comments and go ‘what?’" he said. "A peer of mine thinks that I should’ve aborted my child because he was going to be a burden to a school budget?" Kristan Hawkins, the mother of two children with cystic fibrosis and the president of Students for Life told Fox News she was deeply offended by Hugo’s comments.  "This is discrimination plain and simple," she said. "I think people who say that the sick cost too much for our society better find the fountain of youth real quick because someday that’s going to be them, it's going to be their family members." "This is eugenics, this is eugenics in 2023 America, this is an argument that sadly we’ve heard before and throughout American history, just regurgitated using a bunch of fancy lingo or support for abortion," Hawkins added. Laura Green poses with a down syndrome awareness shirt. Laura Green says her best friend with down syndrome inspired her to be a disability advocate. (Laura Green) In his speech, Hugo said he was "speaking on behalf of the Framingham Democratic Committee," adding that it's their mission to "work for the common good by promoting racial, ethnic, social, and economic equality for the people of Framingham." "It’s astounding to see such a heartless statement, especially coming from 2023 America where we’re supposed to be this progressive inclusive society that celebrates diversity, come out and say ‘well yeah certain people shouldn’t be born because they're going to cost us too much money," Hawkins said. A speaker that came shortly after Hugo at the meeting denounced him and said he went "off the rails." "I’m a lifetime member of the Democratic Committee, and the person who wanted to represent us went off the rails on a different direction that was never brought before the Democratic Committee," said Pat Dunne, a former Framingham School Committee member, according to Framingham Source. "We’re not talking about eliminating special education students and the like. We’re talking about getting out good information to the people in Framingham. And he’s casting a bit too wide for me and that’s why I did want to say something." In a letter sent to city council members several hours before the meeting and obtained by Fox News, Hugo provided a preview of his remarks reported to the Source, asking if the state will "cover the medical costs for a fetus that had sound medical reason to be terminated." He questioned if the state would "cover the costs of special education for a down syndrome affected child" and "pay for the extraordinary medical expense of a child with an atrial septal defect?" "How much does Framingham’s Public School Department pay for unreimbursed special needs school transportation, specialized education and durable supplies?" he asked.  Hugo also claimed crisis pregnancy centers' sonographers would likely misdiagnose defects "while proclaiming that it is a beautiful child living inside the mother and handing her an ultrasound photo that nobody can figure out without training, some diapers and a couple of ‘onesies’ for her new baby."  Hugo said he and others are working to prevent pro-life crisis pregnancy centers from opening up in Framingham. Child with down syndrome is evaluated by a doctor. Michael Hugo, a local democratic official in Framingham, MA questioned the costs of children with down syndrome on his city who are not aborted. Hawkins disputed Hugo’s complaints about crisis pregnancy centers. "Pregnancy care centers offer such excellent free services that even the abortion-supporting community has taken note," she said. "Preventing young mothers from getting free services is a sign that the abortion mindset has poisoned far too many in our culture."  Goldstein added that due to her leadership position with the disabilities commission, she has received many calls and texts from families with special needs children in the community. "People are quite frankly very upset," she said "They want action." Sheryl Goldstein poses with her two daughters. "I saw what Michael had said as a personal attack against my own children," said Sheryl Goldstein, the chair of the Framingham Disabilities Commission. The Framingham Democratic Committee echoed Hugo’s apology in a statement issued last week, claiming his remarks did not reflect the full committee, adding "we fully disavow and denounce them." "If they disavow and do not support those comments, how do you leave him in charge of your organization?" Fetherston who has a child with autism asked. "He has an influential position inside the party and if he even thinks that, much less says it in a public meeting, then he shouldn’t be in a leadership position." "I think he should immediately step down," Fetherston added. Hawkins said that while she believes Hugo should be removed, his blunt comments "hopefully woke up a lot of people to their support of abortion." Neither Hugo nor the Framingham Democratic Committee responded to Fox News’ request for comment.





Article: 48
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Role abortion rights played on Election Day: Underestimated by GOP or overstated by Democrats?
Author:  Paul Steinhauser 
Publication_Date: Published November 21, 2023 4:00am EST
Article_Content: Abortion 'is hardly a silver bullet' for Democrats in electoral politics: Rove RNC chair says Republicans ‘have to talk about abortion’ Ronna McDaniel says it’s "a losing strategy" if the GOP doesn’t return fire against Democrat attacks over the combustible issue of abortion. For Republicans, this month's off-year elections were anything but a success.  The results in gubernatorial and legislative showdowns as well as in some high-profile referendums gave Democrats a big shot of adrenalin while potentially serving as a warning sign for the GOP looking ahead to the 2024 elections for president and control of Congress. Apparently hurting Republicans for a second straight year at the ballot box was the combustible issue of legalized abortion. Abortion on the ballot in Ohio on Election Day 2023 People gather in the parking lot of the Hamilton County Board of Elections as others arrive for early in-person voting in Cincinnati on Nov. 2, 2023. "We do have to talk about abortion," Republican National Committee Chair Ronna McDaniel has been saying since the election results this month. McDaniel said GOP candidates "are not responding to the lies of the Democrats on abortion. We have to come out and very vocally say where we stand." The month's election results were the latest in a slew of statewide victories for abortion rights since the blockbuster move last year by the Supreme Court’s conservative majority to overturn the landmark, nearly half-century-old Roe v. Wade ruling, which had allowed for legalized abortions nationwide. The decision moved the divisive issue back to the states. And it's forced Republicans to play plenty of defense in elections across the country. A party that's nearly entirely "pro-life" has had to deal with an electorate in which a majority of Americans support at least some form of abortion access. Democrats made abortion a major part of their messaging in Kentucky's gubernatorial showdown, in Virginia's legislative contests, in a state Supreme Court race in battleground Pennsylvania, and in an Ohio referendum on codifying abortion rights. And Democrats chalked up wins in all of those states. Apparently hurting Republicans for a second straight year at the ballot box was the combustible issue of legalized abortion. But veteran Republican strategist and Fox News contributor Karl Rove, who masterminded former President George W. Bush's two White House victories and served as his top White House political adviser, says the effect of abortion on this month's elections is overblown. "Abortion might have helped Democrats sometimes, but the issue is hardly a silver bullet," Rove wrote last week in a Wall Street Journal opinion piece. And taking aim at the political weaknesses of President Biden, Rove said that "as Virginia showed, as long as Mr. Biden is the face of the party, pro-life candidates can make gains on Democratic turf if they frame the abortion issue with care." Karl Rove on 2024: Biden has ‘real problem’ But Democrats see the issue of abortion as a continued "mobilizing" factor to energize their base and attract crucial swing or moderate voters going forward. Veteran strategist and Democratic National Committee member Maria Cardona pointed to last year's midterms, in which the Democrats overperformed, and told Fox News that the 2023 results "were similar to what happened in 2022 when everybody was predicting a red wave." Looking ahead to next year's contests, Cardona predicted that abortion "is going to continue to be an incredibly mobilizing issue." Longtime GOP strategist David Kochel noted that abortion remains "a terrible problem" for Republicans. "They’re out of step with where the country is" on the issue, he said. Kochel, a veteran of numerous presidential and statewide campaigns in Iowa, acknowledged that Republicans are "not going to win on abortion" and urged GOP candidates to "fight where they can win – on the economy, foreign policy, competence." McDaniel, talking to Fox News Digital and other news organizations the night after this month's elections, said Republicans need to more forcefully push back on Democrat attacks over where they stand on abortion. "If a lie is up against you with $30 million behind it, and you do not respond, that lie becomes the truth, and that’s the Democrats’ playbook, and our candidates have to respond on TV," she said."As a suburban woman who’s heading the party, we have to talk about abortion," McDaniel added. "If we do not get up on TV and define ourselves on this issue and allow the Democrats to do it for us, it’s a losing strategy."





Article: 49
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Ohio Secretary of State Frank LaRose consulted anti-abortion groups while drafting Issue 1 ballot language
Author:  Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published November 30, 2023 11:50am EST
Article_Content: The OH Republican's wording was criticized for being misleading, substituting 'unborn child' for 'fetus' Ohio Secretary of State Frank LaRose consulted with three anti-abortion groups while drafting ballot language for an abortion-rights measure. The ballot summary faced criticism from Issue 1 supporters, who deemed it "misleading and defective." The Ohio Supreme Court ruled that only the part suggesting limiting citizens was misleading and required rewriting in a divided decision.Republican Ohio Secretary of State Frank LaRose consulted with three prominent anti-abortion groups while drafting the contested ballot language used to describe Issue 1, an abortion-rights measure overwhelmingly approved by voters earlier this month, cleveland.com reported Wednesday. The Republican elections chief and 2024 U.S. Senate candidate revealed having help with the wording while speaking at a Nov. 17 candidate forum hosted by the local Republican club Strongsville GOP, according to the news organization. The constitutional amendment's backers blasted the ballot summary offered by LaRose, in his role as chair of the Ohio Ballot Board, as "rife with misleading and defective language" intended to encourage "no" votes. Frank LaRose speaks Ohio Secretary of State Frank LaRose speaks to the Fairfield County Lincoln Republican Club on March 24, 2022, in Pickerington, Ohio. LaRose says he consulted with anti-abortion groups while drafting the contested ballot language used to describe Issue 1, an abortion-rights measure overwhelmingly approved by voters in November 2023's election. LaRose's wording substituted "unborn child" for "fetus" and suggested the measure would limit "citizens of the State" from passing laws to restrict abortion access when it actually limited state government from doing so. The pro-Issue 1 campaign, Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights, eventually sued and won a part victory at the Ohio Supreme Court. In response to a question at the forum, LaRose said that his office consulted with Susan B. Anthony Pro Life America, the Center for Christian Virtue and Ohio Right to Life while writing the ballot language, three groups with central roles in the anti-Issue 1 campaign, Protect Women Ohio. LaRose said the anti-abortion groups pushed for changing "pregnant person" to "woman" as a way of benefiting their campaign while remaining accurate enough to withstand a court challenge. He said they liked it because their campaign was named Protect Women Ohio and their yard signs said "Protect Women." "So they wanted that," the news organization reported LaRose saying. "They thought that was reasonable and would be helpful to them. And they thought it would be honest." When asked about the language previously, LaRose described his role as writing truthful and unbiased language. Gabriel Mann, a spokesperson for Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights, said it was always clear that LaRose's chosen language was intended to benefit the amendment's opponents. "LaRose never cared about American democracy or Ohio values, which makes him wholly unfit for any public office," Mann told cleveland.com. LaRose spokesperson Mary Cianciolo said the secretary "always is going to represent the conservative values on which he was elected." "The ballot board is a bipartisan body made up of members with at times differing opinions on how public policy should be defined," she said in a statement. "It’s common for members to disagree on the language, as you’ve seen at almost every meeting. The language can be true and defensible at the same time. It was also upheld as accurate by the state Supreme Court." In a divided ruling, justices ruled that only one element of the disputed language, the part that implied it would rein in citizens as opposed to the government, was misleading and had to be rewritten.






Article: 50
News_Outlet: FOX
Title: Ohio constitutional amendment on abortion goes 'way, way too far,' even farther than Roe: Gov. DeWine
Author:  Andrew Mark Miller
Publication_Date: Published October 22, 2023 4:00am EDT
Article_Content: The abortion amendment motivated Gov. DeWine to run an ad opposing a state ballot measure for the first time Ohio governor urges voters to oppose abortion amendment to the constitution that goes "way, way too far" Ohio’s Republican Gov. Mike DeWine spoke to Fox News Digital about how a November abortion measure in Ohio is too extreme for Ohio and goes even farther than Roe v. Wade. FIRST ON FOX: As Ohio voters prepare to decide on sweeping changes to the state's abortion laws, Republican Gov. Mike DeWine has uncharacteristically jumped into the debate with both feet. DeWine explained to Fox News Digital in an interview this week why a November vote to enshrine abortion access into the state’s constitution motivated him to run his first-ever ad addressing a state ballot measure and why he believes the proposal isn’t consistent with what most Ohio voters want.  "Fran and I have never done an ad before for a statewide issue or even a local issue but we both feel very strongly about this and I think whether you’re pro-choice or pro-life the constitutional amendment that we will be voting on in a couple of weeks just goes way, way too far," DeWine told Fox News Digital at the governor’s mansion in Columbus, Ohio following an ad he ran with Ohio’s First Lady urging his constituents to vote "No" on Issue 1, a November constitutional amendment on abortion. "It would allow abortion at any point in the pregnancy," DeWine said. "It would negate Ohio's law that we've had on the books for many, many years that prohibits partial birth abortion."  The future of partial birth and late-term abortion in Ohio has become a prominent topic among opponents of Issue 1, including Protect Women Ohio who has pointed to a $100,000 contribution from Dr. Martin Haskell, a Dayton area doctor whom they describe as "the inventor of the partial-birth abortion procedure," made in support of the constitutional amendment. Mike DeWine Ohio Gov Mike DeWine speaks to Fox News Digital in Columbus, Ohio  (Fox News Digital) "It also really strikes at parents rights and the relationship between a parent and in this case, a daughter," DeWine said. "We have a law that says that you have to have parental consent in regard to a minor getting an abortion that would be knocked out by this constitutional amendment as well. So it would put Ohio in a small category of the most permissive states in the union in regard to abortion. I just don't think it fits Ohio. It's not who we are. It's not where we are." DeWine told Fox News Digital that the groups supporting a "Yes" vote on Issue 1 have run deceptive ads about what the amendment would do.  "I think that the people who are doing these ads that are for issue one are misleading people," DeWine said. One ad talked about the amendment guaranteeing help in regard to miscarriages, said DeWine, but that's not an issue. "Medical assistance is out there. I mean, we have hospitals. They do what they do, doctors. So they're wrapping this into things that are certainly already well taken care of by the medical community and our hospitals and our doctors. So just, you know, I think it's a very misleading campaign that they're running." Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine said pro-abortion groups have misled voters on Issue 1, which will be on the ballot in November DeWine said he doesn't believe Ohio has ever overturned a constitutional amendment that was approved by the people, which means that if this amendment passes it is likely to be permanent. DeWine explained that even under Roe v. Wade, Ohio was permitted to implement some restrictions on abortion and that this amendment would go even further and invalidate those measures.  Even Roe, and another abortion precedent-setting Supreme Court case Planned Parenthood v. Casey, "allowed Ohio and other states to put some guardrails around abortion," DeWine said. "Parental notification was one. Another law that we have in regard to someone with a disability, a child with a disability. You could not have an abortion specifically for the reason that that child was Down's syndrome. You know, these are guardrails… would just go away because this is a constitutional amendment." Many political pundits have concluded that abortion, and the reversal of Roe v. Wade, was an issue that hurt Republicans in last year’s midterm elections preventing them from achieving a "Red Wave" result that gave them commanding control in Congress. Protests at Ohio Statehouse A group of people protests outside the Ohio Statehouse in Columbus, Ohio. However, every governor in the United States that signed abortion restrictions into law won re-election last November in states that included Iowa, Idaho, Florida, South Dakota, Tennessee, South Carolina, Wyoming, Georgia, and in even Ohio.  DeWine signed a heartbeat law prohibiting abortions after 6 weeks and won a landslide re-election victory by 25 points. When asked by Fox News Digital how DeWine was able to effectively communicate the abortion issue, he said he has "tried to focus on the science." "Even if you have people who pro-choice and think that abortion should be allowed at some point up until a certain point, I don't know anybody who thinks that abortion should be permitted all the way up until birth," DeWine said. "I mean that just strikes most people as going too far… I think part of my job is to try, and Fran and I, my wife and I were trying to do with this ad, is just to let people know exactly how radical this constitutional amendment is." DeWine said that most voters he has interacted with don’t want to talk about abortion because it is an "unpleasant subject" which is why he filmed the ad from his kitchen to speak directly to Ohio voters and let them know that wherever they stand on the abortion issue, this measure is too "radical" to enshrine in the state constitution. When asked what he would tell an Ohioan who is undecided on how to vote on Issue 1, the governor said that voters "don’t have to take my word for it" but need only to "look at the language of the constitutional amendment and look at how the courts have defined things in the past." Ohio’s Republican Attorney General Dave Yost put together a comprehensive analysis of what voting "Yes" on Issue one and approving the amendment would mean for abortions in the state and wrote that the language of the amendment "creates a new, legal standard that goes beyond what Roe and Casey said." "The Amendment would not return things to how they were before Dobbs overruled Roe, and is not just ‘restoring Roe,’" Yost said. "It goes further." Yost wrote that several abortion restrictions in the state would be invalidated if the new amendment passes including the Heartbeat Act, the Down Syndrome discrimination law, and the law prohibiting partial birth abortion. Additionally, Yost concludes that several other aspects related to abortion might not immediately be invalidated but will face serious legal challenges with an "uncertain outcome" in courts due to the language of the bill. Those issues include 24-hour waiting period and informed consent, Ohio law that requires a doctor to inform a minor’s parents before performing an abortion on a pregnant minor, abortion pill safety regulations, limits against taxpayer funds for abortion providers. Supporters of Issue 1, including Ohio Citizen Action, have made the argument that voters "are faced with a critical choice to stand up for our personal autonomy" and that "personal decisions should be made by individuals and their families, free from intrusive government oversight." "It's pretty clear that this constitutional amendment just goes farther, much further than what the average Ohioan approves," DeWine told Fox News Digital Ohio State Issue 1 An attendee holds a rosary as she prays during a "rosary rally" on Sunday, Aug. 6, 2023, in Norwood, Ohio.  "If a voter is comfortable with abortion up until the time of birth, they're probably going to be okay with this amendment — if they're comfortable with parents not being involved in the most important decision their daughter will ever make or certainly has made up until that point in her life. If they're okay with that, then they should vote for this," DeWine added. "If you think that parents need to be involved and your daughter or anybody's daughter needs parents to be involved, and you think that abortion should not be permitted all the way up until the time of birth, then this constitutional amendment is not right and people should vote against it."





