Article: 1
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: California's Newsom slams Walgreens on abortion drugs
Author: Eric Revell,  Fox Business
Publication_Date: March 7, 2023 | 3:50am
Article_Content: California Governor Gavin Newsom (D) slammed Walgreens over its decision to stop selling abortion pills in Republican states with attorneys general who had warned that doing so could put the pharmacy in legal jeopardy. “California won’t be doing business with Walgreens – or any company that cowers to the extremists and puts women’s lives at risk,” Newsom tweeted on Monday. “We’re done.” Newsom’s tweet comes after Walgreens announced last week that it will stop selling the abortion pill mifepristone in the 20 states where Republican attorneys general have outlined objections to the sale of the drug through the mail.  The attorneys general argued in their letter published in February that federal criminal law prohibits the use of the mail to distribute abortion drugs, and noted that the law is enforceable through a private right of action. They also raised questions about the Biden administration’s interpretation of the federal law in play, as the White House argued that the text of the law shouldn’t be “‘[t]aken literally’” despite acknowledging the language of the text. California Gov. Gavin Newsom criticized Walgreens for stopping sales of an abortion drug in 20 states. The AGs wrote: “We reject the Biden administration’s bizarre interpretation, and we expect courts will as well. Courts do not lightly ignore the plain text of statutes. And the Supreme Court has been openly aversive to other attempts by the Biden administration to press antitextual arguments.” The 20 states that have informed Walgreens of their intention to block the sale of mifepristone by mail include Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, Mississippi, Montana, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah and West Virginia. There are 20 states that have informed Walgreens of their intention to block the sale of mifepristone by mail. Mifepristone is a drug that was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2000 to cause an abortion or assist with a miscarriage up to the 10th week of pregnancy when used in combination with misoprostol. Mifepristone is used first to dilate the cervix and block a hormone needed to sustain a pregnancy, then misoprostol is taken a day or two later to cause contractions that empty the uterus and end the pregnancy.  For over 20 years, the FDA only permitted mifepristone to be dispensed by specialty offices and clinics due to safety concerns.Mifepristone was authorized for use in abortions by the FDA in 2000. The agency has loosened those requirements and in 2021, eliminated an in-person requirement for obtaining the drug and permitted it to be prescribed via telehealth and shipped by mail-order pharmacies. Those changes have seen the number of medication abortions rise, as they accounted for 54% of all U.S. abortions in 2020, according to the Guttmacher Institute, which supports abortion rights. Earlier this year, the FDA allowed pharmacies like Walgreens to start dispensing the drug after they undergo certification, which entails meeting standards for shipping, tracking, and confidentially storing prescription information. In response to Newsom’s comments, a Walgreens spokesperson told FOX Business, “From the outset, we have made our intentions clear to become a certified pharmacy to distribute mifepristone wherever legally possible to do so.”Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron is one of the 20 state attorneys general who wrote to Walgreens warning of potential legal consequences if they sell abortion drug mifepristone in their states. Walgreens released a statement Monday evening which said: “We want to be very clear about what our position has always been: Walgreens plans to dispense Mifepristone in any jurisdiction where it is legally permissible to do so. Once we are certified by the FDA, we will dispense this medication consistent with federal and state laws. Providing legally approved medications to patients is what pharmacies do, and is rooted in our commitment to the communities in which we operate.” A group opposed to abortion called the Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF) filed a lawsuit in November seeking to revoke the FDA’s authorization of mifepristone. ADF argues that the FDA’s testing of the drugs wasn’t up to its full standards prior to its release onto the market over 20 years ago. A ruling in the federal district court that has heard arguments in the ADF lawsuit against the FDA could come at any time. It’s possible that the case will be appealed, leaving the timeline for a final resolution of the case uncertain.








Article: 2
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Arrest made in fire at planned Wyoming abortion clinic
Author: Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published March 22, 2023, 10:10 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Lorna Roxanne Green, 22, was arrested on charges of setting fire to a building in Wyoming that was being renovated into an abortion clinic. A woman was arrested on charges of setting fire to a building in Wyoming that was being renovated to house the state’s only full-service abortion clinic, authorities said Wednesday, hours after a judge temporarily blocked a ban on abortion that went into effect a few days ago.

Lorna Roxanne Green, 22, of Casper, was arrested on Tuesday by Casper police and agents from the FBI and the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Wyoming U.S. Attorney Nicholas Vassallo said in a statement.

Green faces up to 20 years in prison and a $250,000 fine if convicted, according to the statement.

She is scheduled to appear in federal court in Cheyenne on Thursday morning.

The fire was set on May 25, 2022, at a stucco house in Casper, the state’s second-largest city and the site of frequent anti-abortion protests. A witness told police they heard glass breaking and saw a person leaving the area carrying a gas can and a black bag. Security video released by police showed a woman in a hooded shirt and mask carrying what appeared to be a red fuel can through a room of the building just before the fire.

No one was injured in the blaze, which left the planned Wellspring Health Access clinic with broken windows and smoke damage.

“Now that a suspect has been arrested, we can continue our singular focus on providing quality reproductive health care to the Casper community in a safe, compassionate environment,” Wellspring President Julie Burkhart said in a statement.

The clinic had been scheduled to open last summer as the only facility of its kind in the state, offering women’s health care, family planning and gender-affirming health care in addition to abortion services.

But the fire delayed those plans.

It was then slated to open next month but was thrown into doubt after Gov. Mark Gordon allowed a broad new abortion ban to take effect on Sunday without his signature.

On Wednesday, Teton County District Court Judge Melissa Owens halted the ban after a hearing in which abortion-rights supporters said the law harms pregnant women and their doctors and violates the state constitution.

Owens suspended the ban for at least two weeks.

The ban prohibits abortion at all stages of pregnancy except in cases of rape or incest that’s reported to police, or to save a woman’s life.

An amendment in the Wyoming Constitution says adults have a right to make their own health care decisions, so Republicans enacted a ban that states abortion is not health care. Owens had also blocked a previous ban since shortly after it took effect last summer.

Prior to the latest ban, a clinic in the mountain town of Jackson provided medication abortions.






Article: 3
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Texas activists push for ‘trafficking’ laws to prevent abortions
Author: Isabel Vincent
Publication_Date: Published Sep. 2, 2023, 12:53 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Conservative activists in Texas have developed a new strategy to prevent abortions: making it illegal to use local roads to bring those seeking the procedure to states where it is legal.

Abortion critics in eastern Texas are targeting regions along interstate highways and near airports, urging local counties and cities to adopt ordinances that would effectively confine pregnant women in the antiabortion state, according to the Washington Post.

Pastor Mark Lee Dickson, who heads up Right to Life of East Texas, is behind the push to pass what he calls “trafficking” rules, which would empower citizens to sue those who transport women along local roads to seek abortions.

Abortion is largely banned in Texas after the state passed new restrictions after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade last summer.

According to Dickson, trafficking occurs because “the unborn child is always taken against their will.”

The ordinance would not punish the pregnant woman, Dickson told the newspaper.

Llano, a city in central Texas, considered the measure last month but tabled the vote on Friday, according to reports. Abortion rights activists marched near the State Capitol in Austin last summer after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. In January, the Roosevelt County Commission in New Mexico voted to adopt an ordinance outlawing abortion, becoming part of a growing movement of Sanctuary Cities for the Unborn. Mayor Marion Bishop said the law would be difficult to enforce and is mostly symbolic.

“Is it absolutely necessary? No,” she told the newspaper. “Does it make a statement? Yes, it does.”

The Texas cities of Lubbock and Odessa are among those considering the trafficking ordinance, according to reports.

Dickson is also behind the push to create Sanctuary Cities for the Unborn, which encourages cities and towns to adopt ordinances such as trafficking measures.

In 2019, Waksom, Texas, became the first city to join the movement, which now includes 67 municipalities spread throughout the Lone Star state, Nebraska, New Mexico, Ohio, and Illinois, according to Dickson’s website. Last month, Mitchell County in Texas voted to join Sanctuary Cities for the Unborn, which outlaws abortion and abortion “trafficking” in the unincorporated parts of the county. Demonstrators protest against the Supreme Court’s overturning of Roe v. Wade last year. The Goliad County Commission in Texas voted to adopt an ordinance outlawing abortion and “trafficking” in the unincorporated part of the county.
Lawyer Jonathan Mitchell, the former Texas Solicitor General, is also an architect of the sanctuary movement.




Article: 4
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Idaho governor signs ‘abortion trafficking’ bill into law
Author: Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published April 6, 2023, 5:27 a.m. ET
Article_Content: Idaho Gov. Brad Little signed a bill into law Wednesday that makes it illegal for an adult to help a minor get an abortion without parental consent.

The law is the first of its kind in the U.S. and creates a new crime of “abortion trafficking,” barring adults from obtaining abortion pills for a minor or “recruiting, harboring or transporting the pregnant minor” without the consent of the minor’s parent or guardian.

Anyone convicted of breaking the law will face two to five years in prison and could also be sued by the minor’s parent or guardian.

Parents who raped their child will not be able to sue, though the criminal penalties for anyone who helped the minor obtain an abortion will remain in effect.

To sidestep violating a constitutional right to travel between states, Idaho’s law makes illegal only the in-state segment of a trip to an out-of-state abortion provider. Idaho Gov. Brad Little signed a bill into law that makes it illegal for an adult to help a minor get an abortion without parental consent.
AP
Anyone convicted of breaking the law will face two to five years in prison and could also be sued by the minor’s parent or guardian.

Parents who raped their child will not be able to sue, though the criminal penalties for anyone who helped the minor obtain an abortion will remain in effect.

To sidestep violating a constitutional right to travel between states, Idaho’s law makes illegal only the in-state segment of a trip to an out-of-state abortion provider. A “My body, my choice” sign hangs from a hanger outside the Idaho state Capitol in May 2022. The new law makes a new crime called “abortion-trafficking.”
AP
Opponents have promised a legal battle.

“Yet again, Idaho’s governor disregarded constituents and signed HB 242 into law, creating the nation’s first crime of so-called ‘abortion trafficking.’ This legislation is despicable, and we’re going to do everything in our power to stop it,” Idaho State Director for Planned Parenthood Alliance Advocates-West said Wednesday on Twitter. Idaho is one of 13 states that already effectively ban abortion in all stages of pregnancy, and is one of a handful of states that already have laws penalizing those who help people of any age obtain abortions.

State leaders in Washington, Oregon and California have promoted the West Coast as a safe haven for abortion procedures, and lawmakers in Oregon and Washington are considering bills to shield abortion providers and patients from criminal liability.

Oregon’s bill would allow physicians to provide abortion to anyone regardless of age, and would bar them in certain cases from disclosing that information to parents.

Thirty-six states require parental involvement in a minor’s decision to have an abortion, though most allow exceptions under certain circumstances like medical emergencies, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a research group supporting abortion rights.






Article: 5
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Federal appeals court backs limits on abortion pill mifepristone
Author: Victor Nava
Publication_Date: Published Aug. 16, 2023 Updated Aug. 16, 2023, 11:45 p.m. ET
Article_Content: A federal appeals court on Wednesday ruled in favor of placing limits on the use of abortion drug mifepristone, but the restrictions won’t take effect until the Supreme Court decides whether or not to hear the case. 

A three-judge panel on the Fifth US Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans sided with plaintiffs in ruling that mifepristone, the most common form of abortion in the US, cannot be obtained through the mail or administered without a doctor being present. 

The court also ruled that the abortion pill may only be used through the seventh week of pregnancy rather than the tenth.

The judges, all Republican appointees, overturned part of a lower court ruling that would have struck down the Food and Drug Administration’s two-decade-old approval of mifepristone. Abortion pill

Wednesday’s ruling will not take effect until the Supreme Court decides whether to take up the case.
AP
Doctor's office

The fifth circuit ruled that the abortion drug can no longer be obtained through the mail.
AP
“In loosening mifepristone’s safety restrictions, FDA failed to address several important concerns about whether the drug would be safe for the women who use it,” Judge Jennifer Walker Elrod wrote in the panel’s ruling. 

In April, the Supreme Court ruled that the drug must remain available nationwide, staying US District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk’s ruling in a Texas court. 

That stay also applies to the fifth circuit’s Wednesday ruling. 

The Supreme Court is expected to decide in the fall whether it will hear the case. If it chooses not to, the restrictions allowed by the 5th circuit’s ruling may take effect. 

White House Press Secretary Karine Jean-Pierre called Wednesday’s ruling part of a pattern of “unprecedented attacks on women’s health” and said that President Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris “remain firmly committed to defending reproductive health care.” 

“We strongly disagree with today’s ruling from the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals in Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine v. FDA, which undermines FDA’s scientific, independent judgment and reimposes onerous restrictions on access to safe and effective medication abortion,” Jean-Pierre said in a statement. 

abortion pill

Mifepristone is used in combination with a second drug, misoprostol, in more than half of all abortions in the US.
AFP via Getty Images
Planned Parenthood clinic sign

The Biden administration blasted the fifth circuit’s ruling on Wednesday.
AP
Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Xavier Becerra also blasted the fifth circuit’s ruling in a statement. 

“Today’s decision undermines our nation’s entire system of drug approval by overriding the scientific, evidence-based decision-making of the FDA. This decision threatens Americans’ right to access the medications they need and, if it stands, would have a devastating impact on women’s health by restricting their access to reproductive health care,” Becerra wrote. 

“The most important thing to know is that mifepristone remains approved and available while we fight this decision in the courts. We remain confident the law is on our side, and we will continue to vigorously defend the FDA’s independent, science-based drug approval process, and Americans’ right to access the health care they need,” he added. 

Mifepristone, which is manufactured by New York-based drug company Danco Laboratories, is used in combination with a second drug, misoprostol, in more than half of all abortions in the US.





Article: 6
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Supreme Court allows abortion pill to remain available nationwide
Author: Samuel Chamberlain
Publication_Date: Published April 21, 2023 Updated April 21, 2023, 9:59 p.m. ET
Article_Content: The abortion drug mifepristone will remain available nationwide after the Supreme Court stayed a Texas federal judge’s ruling striking down the FDA’s two-decade-old approval of the medication. 

The high court had until 11:59 p.m. Friday to decide whether to keep the ruling by US District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk in place while challenges to the drug made their way through the lower courts. 

The Biden administration and New York-based drug manufacturer Danco Laboratories had asked the justices to intervene and stay the Texas judge’s ruling

Mifepristone is used in combination with a second drug, misoprostol, in more than half of all abortions in the US. The FDA approved its use in 2000.

Justices Samuel Alito and Clarence Thomas indicated they would have allowed Kacsmaryk’s order to remain in effect while litigation continues.

In his dissent, Alito writes that the Biden administration and Danco Laboratories “are not entitled to a stay because they have not shown that they are likely to suffer irreparable harm in the interim.”

He also said that “the Government has not dispelled legitimate doubts that it would even obey an unfavorable order in these cases, much less that it would choose to take enforcement actions to which it has strong objections.”

The court’s action likely means that access to mifepristone will be unchanged at least into next year, as appeals play out, including a potential appeal to the high court.

The abortion drug mifepristone will remain available nationwide.
AP
Alito, who authored last year’s decision overturning Roe v. Wade, had issued a temporary stay of Kacsmaryk’s ruling last week, which was extended an additional two days on Wednesday. 

President Biden on Friday reacted to the court’s stay by declaring that he stands by the “FDA’s evidence-based approval” of the drug.

“As a result of the Supreme Court’s stay, mifepristone remains available and approved for safe and effective use while we continue this fight in the courts,” Biden said in a statement, later adding, “My Administration will continue to defend FDA’s independent, expert authority to review, approve, and regulate a wide range of prescription drugs.

“The stakes could not be higher for women across America. I will continue to fight politically-driven attacks on women’s health. But let’s be clear – the American people must continue to use their vote as their voice, and elect a Congress who will pass a law restoring the protections of Roe v Wade,” the president went on.  Mifepristone is used in combination with a second drug, misoprostol, in more than half of all abortions in the US. The
AFP via Getty Images
On April 7, Kacsmaryk, an appointee of former President Donald Trump, ordered a hold on federal approval of mifepristone.

Minutes after his ruling, Washington state US District Judge Thomas O. Rice, a Barack Obama appointee, barred authorities from restricting access to mifepristone in at least 17 states where Democrats sued to protect availability.

The following week, a three-judge panel of the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals upheld parts of Kacsmaryk’s nationwide injunction, which limited the FDA’s attempts to expand access to the drug, but stayed Kacsmaryk’s suspension of the agency’s 2000 approval of mifepristone. The Biden administration and New York-based drug manufacturer Danco Laboratories had asked the justices to intervene and stay the Texas judge’s ruling
AFP via Getty Images
US Solicitor General Elizabeth Prelogar urged the Supreme Court to allow the drug to remain in use, arguing that the lower court ruling in Texas was “unprecedented.”

Prelogar argued that even enforcing the 5th Circuit’s ruling “would be almost equally disruptive,” because mifepristone currently on the market “would immediately become misbranded” and the generic version would no longer have valid FDA approval.




Article: 7
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: AOC channels Andrew Jackson on abortion pill: ‘Ignore this ruling’
Author: Mary Kay Linge
Publication_Date: Published April 8, 2023 Updated April 8, 2023, 2:44 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Lefty darling Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez wants President Biden to evade a federal judge’s ruling against the abortion pill mifepristone — a move that could trigger a constitutional crisis. “I believe that the Biden Administration should ignore this ruling,” AOC told an incredulous Anderson Cooper on CNN late Friday, “The interesting thing, when it comes to a ruling, is that it relies on enforcement,” Ocasio-Cortez said. “It is up to the Biden administration to enforce, to choose, whether or not to enforce such a ruling,” she added — echoing President Andrew Jackson, another defiant Democrat. Jackson’s notorious refusal to enforce the Supreme Court’s 1832 recognition of the Cherokee Nation’s independence led to the horrors of the Trail of Tears when 15,000 Cherokee were forcibly driven from their ancestral homeland in Georgia. “The justices themselves … are undermining their own enforcement,” the Queens congresswoman charged, by issuing decisions that leftists like herself disdain. On Friday, District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk, a Trump appointee from Texas, ordered the FDA to halt its 20-year-old approval of mifepristone, a widely used abortion medication. The order was stayed pending an appeal. President Joe Biden President Joe Biden called the ruling of a Texas district judge a “political, ideological attack.” mifepristone, an abortion-causing medication District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk, a Trump appointee, ruled that the abortion-causing drug mifepristone was improperly approved by the FDA in 2000. “You know, the courts have the legitimacy, and they rely on the legitimacy of their rulings,” AOC said. “And what they are currently doing is engaged in an unprecedented and dramatic erosion of the legitimacy of the courts.”




Article: 8
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Wesleyan University to cover abortion costs for students starting this fall
Author: Katherine Donlevy
Publication_Date: Published May 11, 2023 Updated May 11, 2023, 6:41 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Starting this fall, Wesleyan University will cover the costs of abortion services for its students.

The elite literal arts school in Connecticut confirmed Thursday that its student health center will offer free emergency contraceptives and help finance abortion procedures in the wake of the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade last June.

“Wesleyan University has long provided financial support for those in need beyond what their medical insurance might cover,” the school said in a statement.

“At a time when reproductive freedom is being threatened around the country, Wesleyan is dedicated to providing students with support for free emergency contraception or for the decision to terminate a pregnancy.”

Wesleyan — located in an abortion-protected state — had previously provided birth control free of charge to its students and offered emergency contraceptives such as Plan B and Ella at a cost. The school decided to expand its abortion services starting in the 2023 fall semester in response to demands from the campus’ Democratic Socialists club.

The group launched an online petition claiming that it was “reasonable” to demand access to free contraceptives considering the school had already made a pro-choice commitment to its campus. Wesleyan University will offer free emergency contraceptives and financial assistance for abortion services starting in the fall semester.
Getty Images
“You can have change. Change doesn’t always have to be difficult, and change doesn’t always mean people are going to tell you no,” Ruby Clarke, a Wesleyan Democratic Socialists member, told WSFB.

The Wesleyan Democratic Socialists also requested covered expenses for off-campus abortions — including transportation to and from clinics — and care for students during academic breaks and those studying abroad, as well as expanded access to information regarding reproductive care access.

The university gave in to the club’s demands, stating it would offer financial assistance to any student whose insurance would not cover the procedure. The school would rely on a student’s insurance plan to pay for abortion services if it were included in the coverage. The college expanded its abortion access following a petition launched by the campus’ Democratic Socialists club.
AP
All students regardless of insurance status would be eligible for free emergency contraceptives after consulting with a nurse at the health center, the school said.

The announcement came one week after New York Gov. Kathy Hochul signed legislation that expanded abortion access across the Empire State’s public college campuses. The bill ensures that any student enrolled at a State University of New York or City University of New York campus will have access to abortion medication.

Hochul signed another law that allows pharmacists to dispense contraception over the counter, as opposed to requiring a prescription.





Article: 9
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Texas judge tosses first lawsuit filed under abortion ban
Author: Matthew Sedacca
Publication_Date: Published Dec. 10, 2022, 1:06 p.m. ET
Article_Content: A Texas judge tossed out the first lawsuit filed under the state’s controversial abortion ban. Bexar County Judge Aaron Haas dismissed a lawsuit filed by Chicago attorney Felipe Gomez against Dr. Alan Braid of San Antonio, after the doctor wrote in a Washington Post Op-Ed that he had intentionally violated the state’s abortion law just days after it took effect in September. The law bans abortions after roughly six weeks into a pregnancy, and allows civil suits against anyone who “aids or abets” an unlawful abortion, for a minimum of $10,000 in damages. In the opinion piece published Sept. 18, Braid wrote that he performed the procedure on a woman more than six weeks into her pregnancy “because I had a duty of care to this patient, as I do for all patients, and because she has a fundamental right to receive this care.” “I fully understood that there could be legal consequences — but I wanted to make sure that Texas didn’t get away with its bid to prevent this blatantly unconstitutional law from being tested,” he added. Judge Aaron Haas dismissed a lawsuit filed by Chicago attorney Felipe Gomez. Haas ruled from the bench that a person who is not directly affected by the abortion procedure had no standing to sue an abortion provider. While the ruling does not overturn Texas’ abortion ban that went into affect after the Supreme Court struck down Roe v. Wade this summer, opponents are hoping the decision will establish a precedent that someone must show they were harmed in order to file suit, the San Antonio Express News reported. Protestors opposing Texas' abortion policies at a rally in Austin. Gomez said that he has filed a notice of appeal.




Article: 10
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: House GOP defense budget targets diversity training, abortion access
Author: Caitlin Doornbos
Publication_Date: Published June 15, 2023, 7:03 p.m. ET
Article_Content: WASHINGTON – The House Appropriations Committee advanced a draft defense budget bill Thursday that takes aim at the Pentagon’s diversity training and abortion reimbursement policy — as well as the former intelligence community officials who smeared The Post’s Hunter Biden reporting.

Republicans’ fiscal year 2024 version of the National Defense Authorization Act lays out a $826.45 billion budget – covering everything from weapons to troop pay, as well as laying out what the Pentagon can’t fund.

The GOP-proposed NDAA, which passed the Appropriations Committee 33-27 along party lines, would bar the military from spending any funds to ensure troop access to abortion — cancelling Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin‘s October 2022 memo allowing female service members leave to get the procedure in states where it’s legal.

That memo, issued in response to the Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade last June, also offered to pay for women’s travel for abortion services and created a program to support DoD doctors prosecuted for carrying them out, all of which would end under the bill.

Rep. Ken Calvert, R-Calif., chairman of the House Appropriations Defense Subcommittee arrives for a closed markup hearing on the Fiscal Year 2024 spending bill for the Pentagon.
Republicans’ fiscal year 2024 version of the National Defense Authorization Act lays out a $826.45 billion budget.
Ridding woke policies
The bill also includes a formal ban on troops using government-issued travel credit cards “for entertainment that includes topless or nude entertainers or participants” or computer networks that do not block porn websites, though the Pentagon already bars such activities. Another provision would ban the department from spending any money to “discriminate” against people who speak or act against gay marriage in the service of a “sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction.”

It would also bar funding “surgical procedures or hormone therapy” for transgender troops, as well as activities that “bring discredit upon the military, such as drag queen story hour for children or the use of drag queens as military recruiters.“

The proposals enraged Democrats, including Appropriations Ranking Member Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.), who told the defense subcommittee in a closed meeting Thursday that the bill “is a non-starter,” according to her prepared remarks.

“Republicans are seeking to reverse bipartisan policies to have equality for women and to make it uncomfortable for LGBTQ+ Americans to serve in the military,” she said. “Fostering an environment where every American who would willingly put their lives on the line to protect and serve this nation feels they are welcomed and supported should not be controversial.”

Most of the conservative social issues are unlikely to be included in the final law. Congress typically spends months amending proposed NDAAs each year, and with a Democratic Senate and White House, such issues as abortion and LGBTQ+ restrictions are expected to be cut out.

To that end, DeLauro criticized GOP members for including the hot-button political issues in the bill, urging her colleagues “to focus on the end goal of funding our government rather than pushing messaging bills that have no future.”

Democratic Sen. Jeff Golden speaks during a news conference and rally against the Republican Senate walkout at the Oregon Capitol, Tuesday, June 6, 2023, in Salem, Ore.

The bill would effectively exempt the Pentagon from complying with President Biden’s prior DEI executive orders.
Funding
The bill would also give the military a boost of 3.6% over 2023 spending levels – roughly $286 million more than what Biden asked for in his proposed Pentagon budget this spring.

That includes a 5.2% pay raise for troops and support for Taiwanese military training programs and weapons deliveries to the island. The bill stops the Biden administration from cutting four ships from the Navy’s fleet and invests in key defense capabilities such as the F-35 fighter jet and the nuclear triad.

“The bill prioritizes funding to counter China, optimize DOD’s workforce, promote innovation, support service members and their families, and increase DOD’s role in combatting the flow of fentanyl, synthetic opioids, and other illegal drugs into the United States,” GOP members of the committee said in a statement Wednesday.

The GOP bill would also prevent the Pentagon from sending funds to the Wuhan Institute of Virology or to fund “any work to be performed by” the New York-based EcoHealth Alliance “in China on research supported by the government of China.”

Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin, left, and Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo, second from left, greet Sen. Bill Hagerty, R-Tenn., right, before a Senate Appropriations hearing on the President's proposed budget request for fiscal year 2024, on Capitol Hill in Washington, Tuesday, May 16, 2023. 

The GOP-proposed NDAA, which passed the Appropriations Committee 33-27 along party lines, would bar the military from spending any funds to ensure troop access to abortion.
AP
While the proposed defense budget provides more than what Biden asked for, it also cuts $20 billion from various Biden-proposed programs, civilian job positions and other discretionary spending. Under the current bill, those funds would be redirected to “address war-fighting needs, counter China, and support our service members and their families,” according to their statement.

“The allocations before us reflect the change Members on my side of the aisle want to see by returning spending to responsible levels,” Appropriations Chair Rep. Kay Granger (R-Texas.) “They also fulfill our commitment to focus our limited resources on the core responsibilities of the federal government. National security, veterans, and border security are our priorities.”

Among the cost-saving cuts? Several Biden-led initiatives that forced the Pentagon to prioritize diversity, equity and inclusion, as well as climate change issues – which Austin has called “an existential threat to our nation’s security.”

A demonstrator holds up a placard depicting a crucified woman as people take to the streets to protest against the legislation on abortion after the recent death of a pregnant woman in March 2023, in downtown Warsaw, Poland on June 14, 2023. 

The budget would defund the office of the DOD deputy inspector general in charge of investigating diversity and inclusion violations.
Checking Biden
The bill would effectively exempt the Pentagon from complying with President Biden’s prior DEI executive orders, such as the annual requirement for all agencies to submit annual plans to boost equity in government programs.

“Equity” in government terms differs from “equality,” which considers all people as deserving an equal chance at success — if not equal outcomes. Equity instead attempts to level the playing field by providing certain “disadvantaged” groups – such as minorities – with opportunities that exclude everyone else.

The GOP bill would ban the DoD from spending money on any DEI efforts and “activities that promote or perpetuate divisive concepts related to race or sex, such as the concepts that one race or sex is inherently superior to another,” such as teaching Critical Race Theory.

Additionally, it would defund the office of the DOD deputy inspector general in charge of investigating diversity and inclusion violations, supremacists, extremists and criminal gang activity in the services. That position was created under the 2021 NDAA.

Aside from social issues, the bill would also rip security clearances from all 51 former intelligence officials who falsely cast doubt on The Post’s Hunter Biden stories by signing the “spies who lie” letter saying the infamous laptop leak had “the classic earmarks of a Russian information operation.”

The bill would also prevent the Pentagon from implementing climate change programs, including a proposed rule to require the DoD acquisitions teams to select only the greenest contractors for multimillion-dollar weapons and military equipment purchases – even as the defense industry races to keep up with growing production needs.

While Republicans said cutting the proposed rule and preventing future funding for climate change programs represents “cuts to wasteful spending,” subcommittee member Rep. Betty McCollum (D-Minn.) said such programs are critical to national security.


What do you think? Post a comment.
“Cuts to climate resiliency programs will leave the department more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change,” she said in a statement. “The cost of repairing unprepared installations damaged by hurricanes, flooding and wildfires will rise.”

It would also bar the Pentagon from spending any money to “influence congressional action on any legislation or appropriation matters,” though lawmakers regularly rely on the expert testimony of Pentagon personnel to decide defense matters.




Article: 11
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Supreme Court allows access to abortion pill mifepristone until Friday
Author: Jesse O’Neill
Publication_Date: Published April 19, 2023 Updated April 19, 2023, 4:48 p.m. ET
Article_Content: The Supreme Court punted an expected Wednesday decision on the legality of the most commonly used abortion method in the US.

Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito ordered his temporary administrative stay of a Texas judge’s April 7 ruling to block the FDA’s decade’s-long approval of mifepristone to be extended until 11:59 p.m. Friday.

Mifepristone is used in conjunction with misoprostol for first-trimester abortions — a medication regimen that has been used to abort first-trimester pregnancies by nearly six million American women since it was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2000, according to the agency.

A pair of legal rulings on opposite sides of the country two weeks ago put the availability of the drug in jeopardy — when more than a dozen red states had banned most abortions following the Supreme Court’s rejection of Roe v. Wade last June.

Texas US District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk — an appointee of former President Donald Trump — took the unprecedented step of putting a hold on the 23-year-old federal approval of mifepristone. The hold prompted Washington US District Judge Thomas Rice — an appointee of former Barack Obama — to preserve access to the drug in 17 states where Democrats sued to protect availability. Mifepristone had been approved by the FDA since 2000 before a Texas judge put a hold on its ruling earlier this month.
Getty Images
A federal appeals court then modified the ruling to allow mifepristone to remain available with limitations while the litigation is sussed out — saying the drug can no longer be mailed and can only be given to women who are less than seven weeks pregnant after they see a doctor three times.

The FDA had long established that the drug was safe to use for women who were up to ten weeks pregnant.

The right-leaning Supreme Court is now tasked with deciding if the mifepristone restrictions will be enforced as the legal challenge of the FDA approval proceeds. Texas US District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk took the unprecedented step of putting a hold on the 23-year-old federal approval of mifepristone.

The Biden administration and drugmaker Danco Laboratories have called on the court to reject the limitations on mifepristone, arguing they are contradictory and spell chaos for providers.

In the wake of the legal uncertainty, New York officials said they would stockpile 150,000 doses of misoprostol, which experts said would end pregnancies safely without mifepristone, although the process would be longer than the two-drug combo. A poll released last week and conducted before the legal clamor found that 53% of Americans disagreed with bans on abortion pills.




Article: 12
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: FDA approval of abortion pill mifepristone in limbo after conflicting rulings
Author: Patrick Reilly
Publication_Date: Published April 7, 2023 Updated April 8, 2023, 10:50 a.m. ET
Article_Content: A federal judge in Texas on Friday ordered a hold on the approval of the abortion medication mifepristone. Future access to the most commonly used abortion method in the country was in limbo Friday following conflicting federal court rulings issued minutes apart over the legality of abortion pill mifepristone, which has been FDA-approved for more than two decades.

District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk, a Trump appointee from Texas, ordered a hold on federal approval of the drug despite decades of approval by scientists and healthcare experts.

Around the same time, District Judge Thomas O. Rice, an Obama appointee from Washington, ordered the opposite — barring authorities from restricting access to mifepristone in at least 17 states where Democrats have sued to protect availability.

In the wake of the dueling rulings, the Associated Press reported that mifepristone appeared to remain at least immediately available. 

Mifepristone is the first of a two-drug regimen that has long been the standard for medication abortion in the US since it was approved by the FDA in 2000.The drug is one of two used for medication abortion in the United States, along with misoprostol, which is also used to treat other medical conditions and used as the second drug in the chemical abortion regimen.

There is no precedent for a lone judge overruling the medical decisions of the Food and Drug Administration.

Kacsmaryk signed an injunction directing the FDA to stay mifepristone’s approval while a lawsuit in Texas challenging the safety and approval of the drug continues. The government has seven days to appeal.

“Simply put, FDA stonewalled judicial review — until now,” Kacsmaryk wrote in the 67-page ruling.

Plaintiffs wanted Kacsmaryk to go even further by withdrawing or suspending the abortion medication from the list of approved drugs.

Federal lawyers representing the FDA are expected to swiftly appeal the ruling and the White House is reportedly reviewing the decision.

US Clinics and doctors that prescribe the combination of mifepristone and misoprostol have said they plan to switch to using only misoprostol — slightly less effective at terminating pregnancies — if mifepristone were pulled from the market.

Misoprostol is widely used for abortions in countries where mifepristone is not legal.

The Texas lawsuit was filed by the Alliance Defending Freedom who were involved in the Mississippi case that led to Roe v. Wade’s reversal. The suit alleges that the FDA did not adequately review its safety risks when it approved the drug 23 years ago.

While courts have long deferred to the FDA on issues of drug safety and effectiveness, the agency has found itself in uncharted waters in a post-Roe country in which abortions are banned or unavailable in 14 states, while16 states have laws specifically targeting abortion medications.

Experts do not expect any immediate impact from the conflicting rulings.

“This has never happened before in history — it’s a huge deal,” Greer Donley, a professor specializing in reproductive health care at the University of Pittsburgh Law School, told AP.  “You have a federal judge who has zero scientific background second guessing every scientific decision that the FDA made.”

Last month, top New York officials demanded the nation’s major pharmacy chains reveal their plans about making the abortion pill mifepristone available after Walgreens said it would not distribute abortion pills in some Republican states. A letter signed by Gov. Kathy Hochul and state Attorney General Letitia James requested Walgreens, CVS Health and Rite Aid show their commitment to dispense mifepristone at pharmacies and via mail in the state.

In February, 20 Republican state attorneys general wrote to Walgreens threatening legal consequences if Walgreens provided mifepristone to consumers in their pharmacies across the country.








Article: 13
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: US Marshals told ‘not’ to arrest abortion protesters at SCOTUS justices’ homes
Author: Mark Moore
Publication_Date: Published March 29, 2023 Updated March 29, 2023, 5:40 p.m. ET
Article_Content: US Marshals assigned to protect Supreme Court justices’ homes following the reversal of Roe v. Wade last year were directed “not” to arrest protesters “unless absolutely necessary,” according to newly revealed documents.

Sen. Katie Britt (R-Ala.) unveiled a series of training slides used to prepare Marshals for their assignments as she grilled Attorney General Merrick Garland at a Senate Appropriations subcommittee hearing Tuesday.

The slides instructed the Marshals to “avoid​, unless absolutely necessary,​ any criminal enforcement​”​ ​involving protesters and that “making arrests and initiating prosecutions was not the goal” of their being stationed outside the residences of the court’s six conservative jurists.

Britt noted that the word “not” in the latter slide was italicized and underlined for emphasis. 

Another slide directed Marshals not to “engage [in] protest-related enforcement” and to allow the protesters to exercise their First Amendment rights except to protect the justices and their families. 

​Britt said the slides were obtained from a Justice Department whistleblower who objected to Garland’s March 1 testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee. 

Police stand guard outside the home of Justice Brett Kavanaugh last September as people protested SCOTUS’ decision to overturn Roe v. Wade.

Attorney General Merrick Garland testifying at a at a Senate Appropriations subcommittee hearing on March 28, 2023.

At that hearing, Garland insisted that Marshals were empowered to decide in the field whether to make arrests.

However, another slide cited by Britt directed Marshals to clear any “enforcement action” with the local US Attorney’s office “in advance” and warned: “It is counter-productive to make [probable cause] arrests on cases that the USAO will not charge and prosecute.”

“Were you, at any point before your testimony in front of the Judiciary Committee, aware of these training materials or the fact that the Marshals had been heavily discouraged from making arrests … ?” Britt asked Garland.

​”This is the first time I’ve seen the slide deck,” the AG responded, noting he was the first attorney general to ever order Marshals to protect the justices at their homes around the clock. ​

Sen. Katie Britt unveiled training slides instructing US Marshals to “avoid​, unless absolutely necessary,​ any criminal enforcement​”​ involving the protesters.
Protesters marching outside of Supreme Court Justice Amy Coney Barrett’s home in Falls Church, Virginia on June 30, 2022.
Garland went on to say that protecting the justices was the Marshals’ “principal responsibility” but that wouldn’t stop them from “bringing other kinds of arrests.”

“It is clear when you look at these slides, the Marshals were not given those directives,” Britt told Garland. “I would like for you to take a look at that.”

Federal law makes it illegal to picket or parade near a judge’s residence with the intent to interfere, obstruct or impede the administration of justice. 

Attorney General Merrick Garland testifies at a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on March 1.
Getty Images
Conservatives and Republicans have repeatedly demanded Garland explain why no protesters were arrested or charged under the statute this past summer.

The high court by a 6-3 ruling overturned the landmark Roe decision legalizing abortion nationwide on June 24, 2022, sparking protests and rallies that soon spread from the Supreme Court building to the nation’s streets and eventually to the conservative justices’ homes outside Washington.

On more than one occasion, protesters stood outside Justice Clarence Thomas’ residence shouting “no privacy for us, no peace for you.”
Law enforcement officers guarding Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh’s house in Chevy Chase, Maryland as activists hold a demonstration on June 29, 2022.
They also gathered around the homes of Justices Brett Kavanaugh, Amy Coney Barrett, Samuel Alito — who authored the opinion overturning Roe, John Roberts and Neil Gorsuch. 
A California man, Nicholas Roske, was arrested outside of Kavanaugh’s home in early June by US Marshals after he hatched a plot to kill the justice following the leak of Alito’s draft opinion the previous month.




Article: 14
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Jane Fonda quips women will resort to ‘murder’ to protect abortion rights
Author: Katherine Donlevy
Publication_Date: Published March 10, 2023 Updated March 10, 2023, 9:21 p.m. ET
Article_Content: “Hanoi Jane” is at it again.

Decorated actress and controversial activist Jane Fonda suggested on “The View” Friday that American women might have to resort to “murder” to regain autonomy of their bodies in the aftermath of the Roe v. Wade reversal.

The Oscar winner made the comment when the hosts asked her what could she possibly do other than march and protest to stop the recent spread of laws curbing abortion in many states.

“Well, I’ve thought of murder,” Fonda quipped, in a comment that may have been lost under crosstalk until Lily Tomlin asked her to repeat herself.

“Murder,” Fonda re-stated adamantly.

The subject came during an appearance with her “80 for Brady” co-star Tomlin that started with show’s panel asking if the duo would be able to film a sequel to their iconic 1980 movie “9 to 5.”

The leading ladies said it would be difficult — though not impossible — because of declining workers’ rights and limitations brought in by contract work.

The 85-year-old took the opportunity to segue the conversation into a discussion on the recent limitations some states have placed on abortion since the supreme court ruling nixing Roe.

“We have experienced, many decades now, of having agency over our body and being able to determine when and how many children they have,” Fonda after agreeing with Tomlin’s statement that the county is “backsliding.”

“We know what that feels like. We know what that’s done for our lives. We’re not going back. I don’t care what the laws are. We’re not going back.”

Jane Fonda suggests 'murder' to fight abortion laws in wild appearance on 'The View.'

Jane Fonda adamantly said she would continue to fight for women’s rights.
The audience erupted in applause, but the panel only smirked and attributed the comment to “Jane’s activism.”

Sunny Hostin joked the stance would earn her a Nobel Prize.

Joy Behar challenged Fonda and asked how she could enact change other than through marching and protesting, demonstrations Fonda has been known to participate in — and get arrested for involvement in — over the last few decades.

The View talks to Jane and Lily.

The View panel laughed and said Fonda was only joking when she suggested murder.

That when Fonda made her “murder” comment, prompting the panel burst into uncomfortable laughter and quickly try to move the conversation along.

“Don’t say that,” Tomlin warned.

“She’s just kidding. Wait a second… They’ll pick up on that and just run with it. She’s just kidding,” Behar loudly stated, despite Fonda keeping a serious, unsmiling look on her face.

As predicted, the conservative backlash was swift.

Mercedes Schlapp, a former Trump administration White House aide, accused Fonda of “inciting violence against pro-life politicians.”

Actress Jane Fonda is arrested by U.S. Capitol Police along with Ted Danson and other climate activists after blocking 1st Street in front of the Capitol on Friday, Oct. 25, 2019. 
3
onda is known for protesting, and was arrested at a Washington DC climate rally in 2019.
Rep. Majorie Greene (R-GA) said she would report Fonda for her statements and The View for airing them, before crudely telling Fonda: “your eggs are dried up so you don’t have to worry about getting pregnant anytime soon, so you can retire from demanding baby murder now.”

Fonda, a long time provocateur who got the nickname “Hanoi Jane” after visiting North Vietnamese troops during the war in 1972, held her ground in an interview with the Daily Beast.

“While women’s reproductive rights are a very serious issue and extremely important to me, my comment on The View was obviously made in jest,” said Fonda. “My body language and tone made it clear to those in the room—and to anyone watching—that I was using hyperbole to make a point.”

Fonda — who was arrested at a climate protest in 2019 — has more recently apologized for her Hanoi trip, during which she was infamously pictured sitting on a North Vietnamese anti-aircraft gun in an image that led to much condemnation in the US.





Article: 15
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Wyoming governor Mark Gordon signs measure prohibiting abortion pills
Author: Associated Press
Publication_Date: 
Article_Content: Published March 18, 2023 Updated March 18, 2023, 1:03 a.m. ET



Wyoming Gov. Mark Gordon signed a bill Friday night prohibiting abortion pills in the state and also allowed a separate measure restricting abortion to become law without his signature.

In a statement, Gordon expressed concern that the latter law, dubbed the Life is a Human Right Act would result in a lawsuit that will “delay any resolution to the constitutionality of the abortion ban in Wyoming.”

He noted that earlier in the day, plaintiffs in an ongoing lawsuit filed a challenge to the new law in the event he did not issue a veto.

“I believe this question needs to be decided as soon as possible so that the issue of abortion in Wyoming can be finally resolved, and that is best done with a vote of the people,” Gordon, a Republican, said in a statement.

The Wyoming governor’s decision on abortion pills comes after they took center stage this week in Texas, where a federal judge raised questions about a Christian group’s effort to overturn the decades-old U.S. approval of a leading abortion drug, mifepristone. The Plan B pill, also known as the “morning after” pill.
Getty Images
In a statement, Wyoming ACLU advocacy director Antonio Serrano criticized the governor’s decision to sign the law.

“A person’s health, not politics, should guide important medical decisions — including the decision to have an abortion,” Serrano said.

A two-pill combination of mifepristone and another drug is the most common form of abortion in the U.S.

Medication abortions became the preferred method for ending pregnancy in the U.S. even before the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, the ruling that protected the right to abortion for nearly five decades. Wyoming joins 15 other states that have already limited access to abortion pills.
Joe Sohm/Visions of America/Univ
Fifteen states already have limited access to abortion pills, including six that require an in-person physician visit. Those laws could withstand court challenges; states have long had authority over how physicians, pharmacists and other providers practice medicine.

States also set the rules for telemedicine consultations used to prescribe medications. Generally that means health providers in states with restrictions on abortion pills could face penalties, such as fines or license suspension, for trying to send pills through the mail.

Women have already been traveling across state lines to places where abortion pill access is easier. That trend is expected to increase.

Since the reversal of Roe last June, abortion restrictions have been up to states and the landscape has shifted quickly. Thirteen states are now enforcing bans on abortion at any point in pregnancy, and one more, Georgia, bans it once cardiac activity can be detected, or at about six weeks’ gestation.

Courts have put on hold enforcement of abortion bans or deep restrictions in Arizona, Indiana, Montana, Ohio, South Carolina, Utah and Wyoming. Idaho courts have forced the state to allow abortions during medical emergencies.





Article: 16
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Nevada judge rules out abortion rights ballot push for 2024
Author: Josh Christenson
Publication_Date: Published Nov. 24, 2023, 1:40 p.m. ET
Article_Content: A Nevada judge has nixed a 2024 ballot initiative to enshrine the right to have an abortion in the Silver State’s constitution.

Carson City District Court Judge James Russell sided Tuesday with the Coalition for Parents and Children PAC, who filed a lawsuit earlier this month claiming the abortion initiative violated Nevada law, Reno ABC affiliate KOLO-TV reported.

Jason Guinasso, an attorney for the PAC, argued Nov. 11 that the proposed ballot measure amounted to “log rolling” and included sweeping coverage of abortion, birth control, prenatal care and postpartum care — violating state law by allowing more than one subject on a petition, according to the station.

In his ruling, Russell agreed with Guinasso’s assessment.

“Again, it is clear to me this is probably the clearest case I have seen that I think there is a violation of the single subject rule,” the judge reportedly said. Carson City District Court Judge James Russell sided Tuesday with the Coalition for Parents and Children PAC, who filed a lawsuit earlier this month opposing the abortion initiative.
The Washington Post via Getty Images
People wait in line to vote at a polling place on June 14, 2022, in Las Vegas.

Attorney Jason Guinasso in oral arguments on Nov. 11 said the ballot measure amounted to “log rolling” and violated state law for allowing more than one subject on a petition.
AP
“I just, I’ve seen a lot of them over the years and in respect to this particular matter, there are too many subjects. Not all of which are functionally related to each other.”

Attorneys for Planned Parenthood, the American Civil Liberties Union and Nevadans for Reproductive Freedom PAC disagreed with Guinasso’s argument — and abortion initiative supporters said they will appeal the ruling to the state Supreme Court.

“We are optimistic about the ballot initiative as a whole, and you know, we plan to appeal this,” said Lindsey Harmon, an attorney representing Nevadans for Reproductive Freedom. “And we know that in fact, these are all a single subject.”

A woman holds a "Abortion is Health Care" sign as abortion rights activists rally outside the Lloyd D. George Federal Courthouse in protest of the overturning of Roe Vs. Wade by the US Supreme Court, in Las Vegas, Nevada on June 24, 2022.

If the Nevada Supreme Court issues another unfavorable ruling, abortion rights proponents could still collect more than 100,000 signatures in the state by July 8 to force the issue onto the ballot.

The group first filed its petition on Sept. 14.

If the Nevada Supreme Court issues another unfavorable ruling, abortion rights proponents in the state could still collect more than 100,000 signatures by July 8 to force the issue onto the ballot for Election Day 2024.

The petition would amend Article 1 of the Nevada Constitution to state that “every individual has a fundamental right to reproductive freedom, which entails the right to make and effectuate decisions about all matters relating to pregnancy, including, without limitation, prenatal care, childbirth, postpartum care, birth control, vasectomy, tubal ligation, abortion, abortion care, management of a miscarriage and infertility care.”

Protesters march with placards expressing their opinion after sunset during Scotus protest.

The issue has become a flashpoint for national elections, following the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn US constitutional protections for abortion last year in its Dobbs ruling.

Abortion is legal up to 24 weeks of pregnancy in Nevada due to a 1990 ballot referendum that codified the protections in state law and the state’s constitution.

Ohio voters enacted a similar measure through a ballot initiative, passing an amendment to their state Constitution earlier this month by a majority vote to allow for abortion at any point during pregnancy.

The issue has become a flashpoint for national elections following the Supreme Court’s decision in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization last year, which overturned the landmark Roe v. Wade ruling ensuring constitutional protection for abortion nationwide.
Former US president and Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump addresses the Republican Jewish Coalition (RJC) Annual Leadership Summmit on October 28, 2023 at the Venetian Conference Center in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Former President Donald Trump currently leads President Biden by single digits in Nevada, according to the FiveThirtyEight polling aggregator.
AFP via Getty Images
Former President Donald Trump currently leads President Biden by single digits in Nevada, according to the FiveThirtyEight polling aggregator, but it remains unseen how the potential for changes to abortion law would affect electoral outcomes. Virginia Gov. Glenn Youngkin saw Republicans in the state legislature lose control of the House of Delegates and fail to win the state Senate while campaigning in this year’s election on a pledge to pass a 15-week abortion ban.




Article: 17
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Vatican defrocks anti-abortion US priest Frank Pavone for ‘blasphemous’ posts
Author: Jorge Fitz-Gibbon
Publication_Date: Published Dec. 18, 2022 Updated Dec. 19, 2022, 11:18 a.m. ET
Article_Content: A fervently anti-abortion priest who placed an aborted fetus on a church altar and posted an online video of it has been defrocked by the Vatican for his “blasphemous communications on social media.”

Frank Pavone, head of the anti-abortion group Priests for Life, was booted from the priesthood by the church Nov. 9 — with no chance for an appeal, US Archbishop Christophe Pierre announced last week. 

“Rev. Frank Pavone, the founder of the organization, Priests for Life, Inc., was dismissed from the clerical state by the Holy See on 9 November 2022,” the Prefect of the Dicastery for the Clergy wrote in a statement shared with Catholic clergy by Pierre.

“This action was taken after Father Pavone was found guilty in canonical proceedings of blasphemous communications on social media, and of persistent disobedience of the lawful instructions of his diocesan bishop,” the statement said. 

The statement added that Pavone had been given “ample opportunity to defend himself,” but it was determined that he “had no reasonable justification for his actions.”

Frank Pavone heads the anti-abortion group Priests for Life.
Getty Images
Pavone, a supporter of former President Donald Trump and a frequent critic of Democratic pols including Hillary Clinton and President Biden, had been investigated by his then-diocese in Amarillo, Texas, for the 2016 fetus stunt.

The defrocked priest remained defiant in the wake of the Dec. 13 announcement.

Frank Pavone has been defrocked for “blasphemous communications on social media” and “persistent disobedience.”
Greg Kahn/Naples Daily News via AP
“So, in every profession, including the priesthood, if you defend the #unborn, you will be treated like them,” Pavone posted on Twitter. “The only difference is that when we are ‘aborted,’ we continue to speak, loud and clear.”

Among those still supporting Pavone is Tyler, Texas, Bishop Joseph Strickland.

Pavone was investigated for having placed an aborted fetus on an altar and posting a video of it on two social media sites in 2016.
Getty Images
“The blasphemy is that this holy priest is canceled while an evil president promotes the denial of truth & the murder of the unborn at every turn,” Strickland tweeted. “Vatican officials promote immorality & denial of the deposit of faith & priests promote gender confusion devastating lives.”

Pavone had been in hot water with the Vatican for years and had restrictions placed on his Texas ministry in 2011, although he appealed, and those were ultimately relaxed. 

The outspoken now-ex-priest sports a MAGA hat on his Twitter account and features a photo of Trump in the background.

Trump has become a champion for anti-abortion advocates for his appointments to the US Supreme Court, who helped overturn the landmark Roe v. Wade decision that guaranteed abortion rights in the country. 

The Church’s statement of his dismissal concluded that Priests for Life is not a Catholic organization and that it would be up to the group to determine if Pavone can remain as a “lay person.”

Earlier this month, the controversial group held a “day of mourning” for the baby in an abortion broadcast by NPR, with the fetus christened “Amanda Marie.”





Article: 18
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Arkansas lawmakers propose monument for fetuses aborted under Roe v. Wade
Author: Katherine Donlevy
Publication_Date: Published Feb. 21, 2023, 7:25 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Four Arkansas lawmakers — three male and one female — filed a bill Tuesday to create a monument to fetuses aborted during the nearly 50 years of Roe v. Wade.

The “Monument for the Unborn” would be erected on State Capitol Grounds in Little Rock and would be dedicated to the “at least” 236,243 elective abortions politicians estimate were performed between 1973 and 2022.

The bill refers to the 49-year span as the years “Arkansas was prevented from protecting the life of unborn children.”

Arkansas state Sen. Kim Hammer is the lead signer of the proposed bill.
Arkansas Senate
Arkansas bill proposes mounument to fetuses aborted under Roe v. Wade

Three male lawmakers and one female cosigned the bill.
Arkansas Senate
“As a memorial to the lives lost from 1973 to 2022 due to the decisions of the United States Supreme Court, and as a constant reminder of our duty to protect the life of every innocent human person, no matter how young or old, or how helpless and vulnerable that person may be, it is the intent of the General Assembly of the State of Arkansas to enact the Monument to Unborn Children Display Act … and the Monument to Unborn Children Display Fund,” the unnamed bill states.

A trust fund would also be created to erect the memorial if the bill passes. Only gifts, grants and donations would be used to finance the project.
The bill is spearheaded by four state politicians — three of whom are male.

The Arkansas State Capitol in Little Rock, Arkansas, US, on Tuesday, Feb. 7, 2023. 

The “Monument for the Unborn” would be erected on State Capitol grounds in Little Rock.

Kim Hammer is the lead signer for the state Senate, and is joined by male co-signers Tyler Dees and John Payton.

State Rep. Mary Bentley is the only female sponsor of the bill.

Neither Hammer nor Bentley immediately responded to The Post’s request for comment.

Arkansas instituted a near-total abortion ban — one of the strictest in the country — that makes the procedure illegal at any stage in the pregnancy.

The state only allows the procedure to save the life of the mother. It does not provide exceptions for those impregnated in an act of rape or incest. 



Article: 19
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: RFK Jr. backs, then backs off, support for three-month abortion ban
Author: Ryan King
Publication_Date: Published Aug. 14, 2023 Updated Aug. 14, 2023, 5:37 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Democratic presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy Jr.’s team has distanced the political scion from statements he made over the weekend supporting restrictions on abortion after three months of pregnancy.

“Mr. Kennedy misunderstood a question posed to him by a NBC reporter in a crowded, noisy exhibit hall at the Iowa State Fair,” his campaign wrote in an unsigned statement late Sunday.

“Mr. Kennedy’s position on abortion is that it is always the woman’s right to choose. He does not support legislation banning abortion.” 

Hours earlier, the 69-year-old expressed support for limiting the controversial procedure when pressed by NBC News reporter Ali Vitali in Des Moines.

“The decision to abort a child should be up to the women during the first three months of life,” Kennedy said.

Vitali followed up by asking the candidate whether he would “cap” abortion after three months. RFK Jr.
RFK Jr.’s remarks put him at odds with most of the Democratic Party.

The Kennedy family scion has been a staunch proponent of medical freedom.

“Yes, three months,” replied Kennedy, who did not appear to be confused by his noisy surroundings.

“Once a child is viable, outside the womb, I think then the state has an interest in protecting the child,” he added, according to a transcript posted by Vitali. “I’m for medical freedom. Individuals ought to be able to make their own choices.”

“I think the states have a right to protect a child once the child becomes viable, and that right, it increases. And I think there’s very, very few abortions that are performed after that period of time anyway.”

Late Monday afternoon, Kennedy told The Post in a signed statement that “I am a firm supporter of the principles laid out 50 years ago in Roe v. Wade. 

For Constitutional and moral reasons, I believe the decision on whether to continue a pregnancy should be up to the mother,” he added. “If the courts do not overturn Dobbs v. Jackson and restore abortion rights, I will support legislation to accomplish the same. Body sovereignty must be protected.”

Abortion

Democrats have been hammering Republicans on the issue of abortion, seizing on polling showing a public wary of stringent restrictions.
Some progressive activists have called for very light restrictions and even government aid for obtaining the procedure.
Last year, the Supreme Court overturned precedents first established in Roe v. Wade guaranteeing a national right to abortion access.
Kennedy’s remarks drew rare praise from the anti-abortion group Susan. B Anthony Pro-Life America, which hailed his comments as “a stark contrast to the Democratic Party’s radical stance of abortion on demand, with no protection for babies in the womb or their mothers, right up to the end of pregnancy.”

The Democratic insurgent has drawn kudos from some conservatives over his tendency to buck party orthodoxy on certain issues. Kennedy has been best known on the campaign trial for his bizarre statement last month that COVID-19 may have been “ethnically targeted” to spare Chinese people and Ashkenazi Jews.

The son of the late attorney general and senator from New York Robert F. Kennedy trails President Biden by 50.3 percentage points nationwide, according to the RealClearPolitics polling average.




Article: 20
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Judge ruled Texas’ abortion ban is too restrictive for women with pregnancy complications
Author: Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published Aug. 4, 2023, 11:49 p.m. ET
Article_Content: A Texas judge ruled Friday the state's abortion ban has proven too restrictive for women with serious pregnancy complications and must allow exceptions without doctors fearing the threat of criminal charges. A Texas judge ruled Friday the state’s abortion ban has proven too restrictive for women with serious pregnancy complications and must allow exceptions without doctors fearing the threat of criminal charges.

The ruling is the first to undercut Texas’ law since it took effect in 2022 and delivers a major victory to abortion rights supporters, who see the case as a potential blueprint to weaken restrictions elsewhere that Republican-led states have rushed to implement.

“For the first time in a long time, I cried for joy when I heard the news,” lead plaintiff Amanda Zurawski said in a statement.

“This is exactly why we did this. This is why we put ourselves through the pain and the trauma over and over again to share our experiences and the harms caused by these awful laws.”

The challenge is believed to be the first in the U.S. brought by women who have been denied abortions since the Supreme Court last year overturned Roe v. Wade, which for nearly 50 years had affirmed the constitutional right to an abortion. The ruling is the first to undercut Texas’ law since it took effect in 2022 and delivers a major victory to abortion rights supporters, who see the case as a blueprint to weaken restrictions that Republican-led states have rushed to implement.
AP
The state is expected to seek a swift appeal and has argued that Texas’ ban already allows exceptions, calling doctors’ fears of prosecution unfounded.

“Today’s ruling should prevent other Texans from suffering the unthinkable trauma our plaintiffs endured,” said Nancy Northup, President and CEO of the Center for Reproductive Rights, which helped bring the lawsuit. “It would be unconscionable for the State of Texas to appeal this ruling.”

The immediate impact of State District Judge Jessica Mangrum’s decision was unclear in Texas, where all abortion clinics have shuttered in the past year.

During two days of emotional testimony in an Austin courtroom, women gave wrenching accounts of learning their babies would not survive birth and being unable to travel long distances to states where abortion is still legal.

The court has been clear: doctors must be able to provide patients the standard of care in pregnancy complications.

That standard of care in certain cases is abortion because it is essential, life-saving healthcare.

This decision is a win for Texans with pregnancy complications, however Texas is still denying the right to abortion care for the vast majority of those who seek it.”

The challenge, filed in March, does not seek to repeal Texas’ abortion ban, but instead aims to force more clarity on when exceptions are allowed under the law, which is one of the most restrictive in the U.S.

Under the law in Texas, doctors who perform abortions risk life in prison and fines of up to $100,000.

Opponents say that has left some women with providers who are unwilling to even discuss terminating a pregnancy.

The majority of U.S. adults, including those living in states with the strictest limits on abortion, want it to be legal at least through the initial stages of pregnancy, according to a poll released in late June by The Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research.





Article: 21
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Nebraska mom gets two years in prison for giving daughter abortion pills
Author: Dana Kennedy
Publication_Date: Published Sep. 23, 2023, 3:45 p.m. ET
Article_Content: A Nebraska mom will spend two years in prison after giving her teenage daughter abortion pills, then helping to destroy the fetus.

Jessica Burgess, 42, pleaded guilty in July to several charges, including tampering with human remains, false reporting and providing an abortion after at least 20 weeks of gestation.

Burgess’ then 17-year-old daughter was in her third trimester at the time. Jessica Burgess, 42, is led out of a Nebraska courtroom after being sentenced to two years in prison for giving her daughter abortion pills and helping hide the remains of the fetus. Jessica Burgess, 42, of Norfolk, Nebraska, was sentenced to two years in prison for giving her teenage daughter abortion pills and helping hide the remains of the fetus.
Now 19, Celeste Burgess will also see jail time, having been sentenced in July to 90 days in jail and two years of probation for burning, and burying, the fetus.

The mother, who lives in Norfolk, Neb., about two hours northwest of Omaha, ordered abortion pills online and gave them to her daughter in spring 2022, officials said. Norfolk authorities said the women discussed ending the pregnancy, and destroying the evidence, in Facebook messages. Authorities got a search warrant to access their exchanges after someone tipped them off, then police found the remains of the fetus buried in a field north of Norfolk. Celeste Burgess, now 19, was in her third trimester when the pregnancy was terminated. In one of the Facebook messages, Jessica Burgess instructed her daughter on how to take the pills to end the pregnancy, according to court records. In another, Celeste Burgess wrote, “I will finally be able to wear jeans.”







Article: 22
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Former GOP nominee for Minnesota governor urges Republicans to soften abortion stance
Author: Ryan King
Publication_Date: Published July 24, 2023 Updated July 24, 2023, 6:25 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Scott Jensen, the GOP nominee for Minnesota governor in 2022, has implored the party to soften its stance on abortion.

Jensen, a moderate in the Minnesota state Senate who took hardline anti-abortion stances in last year’s contest, appeared to blame his defeat to incumbent Democratic Gov. Tim Walz, in part, on the the hot button issue, according to an op-ed published Monday.

“When guaranteed access to abortion disappeared and the new reality became that each state would determine its own abortion policy, the nature of the 2022 elections was dramatically altered,” Jensen wrote in The Star Tribune, referencing the US Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade that June.

“A few months later I lost my race by a significant margin,” he wrote.

“Because millions of Americans believed that the Supreme Court’s ruling had had a decisive impact on elections across the nation, I decided to re-examine the abortion issue.” During the 2022 cycle, Jensen, a physician, favored banning the procedure. But his position appeared to dither at times, particularly on what exceptions would be enacted.

Walz hammered him on the controversial issue. Now, Jensen indicates he won’t back a total ban on abortion, and called for nuance from other members of the party.

“We can be pro-life from a personal perspective, and we can be pro-choice from a policy perspective,” he said on local politics podcast “The Break Down with Brodkorb and Becky.”

Jensen also knocked the GOP for being too dogmatic on the issue.

“We have an activist group that plays the five-yard line on two issues in this party and it’s guns and abortion,” Jensen said on the podcast.

Republicans have effectively had a 16-year statewide losing streak in the North Star State. Democrats hold narrow control over both chambers of the state legislature and the governor’s office. Public polling indicates residents of Minnesota are strongly in favor of abortion rights.
AFP via Getty Images
Nationally, Republicans have grappled with fallout from the overturning of Roe v. Wade, the landmark 1973 decision that had legalized abortion throughout the US.

The GOP had been widely expected to surf the red wave to a smashing victory in the midterm elections, but ultimately barely captured the House and lost a seat in the Senate.

Urging the party to soften its approach, Jensen also underscored the moral underpinnings of legislating abortion policy. Democrats have pummeled Republicans over the abortion issue nationally.
AFP via Getty Images
“Remarkable biotechnological advancements emerged that complicated the ethics surrounding abortion,” he wrote in his op-ed. “I am pro-life, but I won’t tell you what determines the beginning of life — because I don’t know,” he added. “My thoughts on abortion are increasingly influenced by my passionate embrace of the importance of bodily autonomy for all, meaning, ‘I get to choose what my body endures.'”




Article: 23
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Florida man accused of fatally shooting pregnant girlfriend, 18, for refusing an abortion
Author: Allie Griffin
Publication_Date: Published Aug. 29, 2023 Updated Aug. 30, 2023, 9:11 a.m. ET
Article_Content: A Florida man has been accused of shooting and killing his pregnant teenage girlfriend and her unborn child after she refused to get an abortion, officials announced Tuesday.

Donovan Faison, 21, was arrested Tuesday for the double homicide of his girlfriend Kaylin Fiengo, 18, and her unborn baby nearly 10 months after the young mom was found shot to death in her car at a park in Sanford, Sanford police said.

Fiengo had driven to Coastline Park on the night of Nov. 11 to meet up with Faison, according to cops.

The same night — after 11 p.m. — she was found dead with a gunshot wound in the driver’s seat of her parked car.

A Sanford police officer who was patrolling the park noticed the car backed into a parking spot and still running. When he peered inside, he discovered Fiengo’s body in the driver’s seat, police said.

The pair had been having frequent arguments over the teen’s pregnancy in the prior weeks.

Faison reportedly wanted Fiengo to terminate her pregnancy but she refused and investigators believe her refusal was the “probable motive” for her murder, Sanford cops said in a release. Donovan Faison was arrested Tuesday and charged with two counts of felony homicide.
Sanford Police Department
The teen was at the end of her first trimester at the time of her murder. Police did not say if Faison was the father of the unborn child.

Sanford police cuffed Faison Tuesday and charged him with two counts of felony homicide — one count for Fiengo and one count for her unborn child.

“Today’s events come after a long, almost ten months, of an exhaustive investigation,” Sanford Police Chief Cecil Smith said in a statement. “Our investigators have made sure every possible shred of evidence was processed and analyzed in order to bring Kaylin’s killer to justice.”

Fiengo also had a 1-year-old son named Ace and was a devoted mother, her parents said at the time of her death.

“Though Kaylin faced [many] challenges that set her apart from her peers in many ways, she made friends everywhere she went,” the teen’s obituary states. “Kaylin loved spending time with her son, siblings, and friends. Kaylin really was a fun-loving child and had an old soul.” Fiengo, who was at the end of her first trimester when she was killed, left behind a 1-year-old son.
Facebook / Kaylin Fiengo
Smith said he hoped Faison’s arrest would bring some closure to the heartbroken family.

“This beautiful, young woman and mother, was taken from this world far too soon, and in a horrific way,” Smith said. “We hope that today’s arrest brings the slightest amount of peace for Kaylin’s family and the young son she left behind. It doesn’t bring her back, but at least she will have the justice she deserves.”



Article: 24
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Iowa cuts off payments for sexual assault victims’ emergency contraception, abortions
Author: Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published April 9, 2023, 2:45 p.m. ET
Article_Content: The Iowa Attorney General’s Office has paused its practice of paying for emergency contraception — and in rare cases, abortions — for victims of sexual assault, a move that drew criticism from some victim advocates.

Federal regulations and state law require Iowa to pay many of the expenses for sexual assault victims who seek medical help, such as the costs of forensic exams and treatment for sexually transmitted infections. Under the previous attorney general, Democrat Tom Miller, Iowa’s victim compensation fund also paid for Plan B, the so-called morning after pill, as well as other treatments to prevent pregnancy.

A spokeswoman for Republican Attorney General Brenna Bird, who defeated Miller’s bid for an 11th term in November, told the Des Moines Register that those payments are now on hold as part of a review of victim services.

“As a part of her top-down, bottom-up audit of victim assistance, Attorney General Bird is carefully evaluating whether this is an appropriate use of public funds,” Bird Press Secretary Alyssa Brouillet said in a statement. “Until that review is complete, payment of these pending claims will be delayed.”

Victim advocates were caught off guard by the pause. Ruth Richardson, CEO of Planned Parenthood North Central States, said in a statement that the move was “deplorable and reprehensible.”
The video player is currently playing an ad. You can skip the ad in 5 sec with a mouse or keyboard
Bird’s decision comes as access to the most commonly used method of abortion in the U.S. plunged into uncertainty following conflicting court rulings on Friday over the legality of the abortion medication mifepristone. For now, the drug the Food and Drug Administration approved in 2000 appeared to remain at least immediately available in the wake of separate rulings issued in quick succession.

U.S. District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk in Texas, an appointee of former President Donald Trump, ordered a hold on federal approval of mifepristone. But that decision came at nearly the same time that U.S. District Judge Thomas O. Rice in Washington state, an appointee of former President Barack Obama, essentially ordered the opposite.

The extraordinary timing of the competing orders revealed the high stakes surrounding the drug nearly a year after the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade and curtailed access to abortion across the country. President Joe Biden said his administration would fight the Texas ruling.

In Iowa, money for the victim compensation fund comes from fines and penalties paid by convicted criminals. For sexual assault victims, state law requires that the fund pay “the cost of a medical examination of a victim for the purpose of gathering evidence and the cost of treatment of a victim for the purpose of preventing venereal disease,” but makes no mention of contraception or pregnancy risk.

What do you think? Post a comment.
Sandi Tibbetts Murphy, who served as director of the victim assistance division under Miller, said the longtime policy for Iowa has been to include the cost of emergency contraception in the expenses covered by the fund. She said that in rare cases, the fund paid for abortions for rape victims.

“My concern is for the victims of sexual assault, who, with no real notice, are now finding themselves either unable to access needed treatment and services, or are now being forced to pay out of their own pocket for those services, when this was done at no fault of their own,” she said.





Article: 25
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Supreme Court’s Alito stays Texas judge’s FDA abortion pill ruling
Author: Victor Nava
Publication_Date: Published April 14, 2023 Updated April 14, 2023, 6:02 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito issued a temporary stay Friday of a Texas judge’s ruling last week that blocked the Food and Drug Administration’s approval of a common abortion drug and would have restricted access to the pills. 

Alito’s administrative stay is in effect until April 19, when the full Supreme Court is expected to issue an order on the matter.

On April 7, Texas US District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk, an appointee of former President Donald Trump, ordered a hold on federal approval of the abortion pill mifepristone – which was greenlit by the FDA more than two decades ago.

Minutes later, Washington state US District Judge Thomas O. Rice, a Barack Obama appointee, barred authorities from restricting access to mifepristone in at least 17 states where Democrats sued to protect availability.

On Wednesday, a three-judge panel of the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals upheld parts of Kacsmaryk’s nationwide injunction, which limited the FDA’s attempts to expand access to the drug, but stayed Kacsmaryk’s suspension of the agency’s 2000 approval of mifepristone. The Biden administration and Danco Laboratories – the company that manufactures mifepristone – petitioned the Supreme Court to stay Kacsmaryk’s ruling. US Solicitor General Elizabeth Prelogar urged the Supreme Court to allow the drug to remain in use on Friday, arguing that the lower court ruling in Texas was “unprecedented.”

Prelogar argued that even enforcing the 5th Circuit’s ruling “would be almost equally disruptive,” because mifepristone currently on the market “would immediately become misbranded” and the generic version would no longer have valid FDA approval.

Mifepristone is used in more than half of all abortions nationwide as the first of a two-drug regimen that is typically used to terminate a pregnancy with medication rather than a medical procedure. More than half of Americans – 53% –  said in a Pew Research Center survey released on Monday that they believe the use of a prescription pill or pills to terminate a pregnancy should be legal in their state.

What do you think? Post a comment.
Nearly 10 months ago, the majority conservative Supreme Court overturned the landmark Roe v. Wade ruling that legalized abortion nationwide, leading to dozens of state efforts to outlaw abortion. 

Alito authored the majority opinion in the June 2022 case, Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. 



Article: 26
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Texas man kills girlfriend for getting abortion he disapproved of, police say
Author: Katherine Donlevy
Publication_Date: Published May 12, 2023 Updated May 12, 2023, 11:00 p.m. ET
Article_Content: An angry Texas man killed his girlfriend Wednesday after he found out she traveled to a pro-choice state for an abortion, according to police.

Harold Thompson, 22, was charged with murder in the shooting death of 26-year-old Gabriella Gonzalez in a strip mall parking lot, Dallas police said.

Gonzalez had just returned the night before from a nearly 800-mile trip to Colorado, where abortion is legal at all stages of pregnancy, according to an arrest warrant affidavit.

Abortions in Texas are prohibited after roughly six weeks except in cases of medical emergency.

“It is believed that the suspect was the father of the child,” the affidavit said. “The suspect did not want (Gonzalez) to get an abortion.”

Surveillance video from the parking lot shows the couple arguing around 7:30 a.m. before Thompson grabs Gonzalez and put her into a chokehold, the document alleges.

Gonzalez “shrugs him off,” police said, and the two continue walking.

That’s when Thompson allegedly pulled out a gun and shot Gonzalez in the head.

Police said he continued shooting her multiple times while she lay on the ground before running away.

Gonzalez was killed at the scene.

At the time of the shooting, Thompson had been charged with assaulting a female family member after he choked her in March.

Though the affidavit does not name the victim, she was likely Gonzalez.

Thompson’s victim told police he had “beat her up multiple times throughout the entirety of their relationship,” the document states.

Thompson also reportedly told police the woman was pregnant with his child at that time.

The victim “reiterated that she is scared of the suspect because he had made threats to harm her family and her children,” according to the affidavit.




Article: 27
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: North Carolina GOP overrides governor’s 12-week abortion ban veto
Author: Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published May 16, 2023, 11:30 p.m. ET
Article_Content: RALEIGH, N.C. — Legislation banning most abortions after 12 weeks of pregnancy will become law in North Carolina after the state’s Republican-controlled General Assembly successfully overrode the Democratic governor’s veto late Tuesday.

The House completed the second and final part of the override vote after a similar three-fifths majority — the fraction necessary — voted for the override earlier Tuesday in the Senate. The party-line outcomes represent a major victory for Republican legislative leaders who needed every GOP member on board to enact the law over Gov. Roy Cooper’s opposition.

Cooper vetoed the measure over the weekend after spending last week traveling around the state to persuade at least one Republican to side with him on the override, which would be enough to uphold his veto. But in the end, the four Republicans targeted by Cooper — including one who recently switched from the Democratic Party — voted to override.

Republicans pitched the measure as a middle-ground change to state law, which currently bans nearly all abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy, without exceptions for rape or incest.

The GOP will push for a 6-week abortion ban this week.
The votes came as abortion rights in the U.S. faced another tectonic shift with lawmakers in South Carolina and Nebraska also considering new abortion limits. North Carolina and South Carolina have been two of the few remaining Southern states with relatively easy access.

Such restrictions are possible because the U.S. Supreme Court last year struck down the landmark 1973 Roe v. Wade ruling, which established a nationwide right to abortion.

Under the bill up for a vote Tuesday in the South Carolina House, abortion access would be almost entirely banned after about six weeks of pregnancy — before women often know they’re pregnant. The South Carolina state Senate previously rejected a proposal to nearly outlaw abortions.

Nationally, bans on abortion throughout pregnancy are in effect in 14 states.

Abortion is banned or severely restricted in much of the South, including bans throughout pregnancy in Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Texas and West Virginia. In Georgia, it’s allowed only in the first six weeks.

The Carolinas, Florida and Virginia are now the main destinations in the region for those seeking legal abortions. Florida has a ban that kicks in 15 weeks into pregnancy. Under a recent law, that would tighten to six weeks pending a court ruling. Further west, women often travel to Illinois, Kansas, New Mexico or Colorado.

If both the North and South Carolina bans become law, combined with Florida’s recent ban, “it would be just devastating for abortion access in the South,” Jamie Lockhart, executive director of Planned Parenthood Advocates of Virginia, said earlier Tuesday.

After the final vote Tuesday in the North Carolina House, abortion-rights advocates and Democrats in the chamber gallery loudly booed the outcome and shouted “Shame!” Many observers in the gallery were escorted out by General Assembly police. 

Similar displeasure poured out after the earlier North Carolina Senate debate, although many anti-abortion demonstrators also were in the audience, pleased with the outcome.

“Today marks the beginning of North Carolina’s first real step towards becoming a pro-life state,” Tami Fitzgerald, executive director of the socially conservative North Carolina Values Coalition, said after the House vote.

Senate Republicans said Cooper ignored $160 million within the measure that would boost funding to increase contraceptive services, reduce infant and maternal mortality and provide paid maternity leave for state employees and teachers.

“This bill provides resources for the pregnant woman. It provides broad resources and a significant knowledge base to enable her, to equip her in finding a path forward — a path forward for her, and a path forward for her unborn child,” said Rep. Kristin Baker, a Cabarrus County Republican and psychiatrist.

Democrats focused on details of the abortion rules, which they said would place barriers between women and their doctors, leaving those who are pregnant in danger, with less access to abortion services.

“Women did not ask for your oversight. We didn’t ask for your approval,” Rep. Julie von Haefen, a Wake County Democrat, told GOP colleagues. “It’s our fundamental right to make decisions about our own bodies and our own health care.”




Article: 28
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: NYC first in US to offer ‘on demand’ abortion kits by phone, virtual appt.
Author: Carl Campanile
Publication_Date: Published Oct. 2, 2023, 7:59 p.m. ET
Article_Content: New York City health-care providers will prescribe and deliver medical abortion pills “on demand” after virtual and phone appointments — the first-of-its-kind program in the US, Mayor Eric Adams said Monday.

Hizzoner said the program is in response to the US Supreme Court’s controversial ruling last year outlawing the federal right to an abortion, undoing the 50-year pro-choice Roe v. Wade precedent — although New York still has among the strongest abortion-rights law in the nation.

“Here in New York City, we will not allow the far right to continue its crusade to strip women of their reproductive rights,” Adams said in a release.

“Access to abortion care will now be available through telehealth visits at NYC Health + Hospitals sites from the comfort of one’s home,” he said.

The “Virtual Express Care” program, operated by the city-run Health +Hospitals system, will offer doctors and counselors for video and tel-health appointments for pregnancy and abortion care seven days a week from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. Women up to 10 weeks pregnant are eligible to participate.

New York City healthcare providers are now able to deliver medical abortion pills after virtual and phone appointments.
Getty Images
ExpressCare is a service that allows patients to receive virtual care from a NYC Health + Hospitals provider using a smartphone, tablet or computer.

“If clinically appropriate and prescribed, patients will be able to receive a medication abortion kit at their New York City address within a few days,” said a City Hall release.

Health + Hospitals serve patients regardless of their ability to pay.

Mayor Adams says NYC will not let far right conservatives strip women of their right to choose.
But the new telehealth-video appointments and abortion care will be covered like any other service, so patients with insurance may need to make a co-pay. 

If patients cannot afford to pay for the service or are uninsured, Virtual ExpressCare will provide care and connect patients to trained financial counselors who can help them enroll in health insurance coverage or financial assistance through NYC Care, Medicaid, and Medicare, with per-visit fees as low as zero, depending on patients’ income and family size.

“Last year, an activist Supreme Court undermined almost 50 years of settled law by overturning Roe v. Wade, but New Yorkers know that access to safe, legal abortion care is the cornerstone of public health, and we will not stand idly by as these attacks on women continue,” Adams said in announcing the expanded access to abortion.

A Mifepristone tablet, the first medication in a medical abortion.
“In New York City, we will never stop fighting for a woman’s right to choose the care that is right for them, and we will never stop working to make abortion care more accessible to all New Yorkers. Telehealth abortion care allows the people in our lives to make the choices they need privately and safely, so that they can decide what is best for them and their futures. This is about protecting the ability for women to control their own bodies, their choices, and their freedoms,” Hizzoner said.

The mayor noted that the new abortion service builds upon others involving reproductive care after the supreme court decision.

The city previously announced the Abortion Access Hub that confidentially refers callers to abortion care and rolled out no-cost medication abortion at the city’s sexual health clinics.

Mifepristone is used with another pill, misoprostol, to abort a pregnancy within the first 11 weeks of gestation.



Article: 29
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: GOP presidential candidates divided on federal government’s role in abortion limits
Author: Victor Nava
Publication_Date: Published Nov. 8, 2023, 11:53 p.m. ET
Article_Content: The five Republican presidential candidates onstage during the third GOP primary debate Wednesday were critical of their party’s efforts to chart a path forward on abortion in the wake of the 2022 Supreme Court ruling that overturned Roe v. Wade.  

Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, who argued the country is “better off when we can promote a culture of life,” said Republicans at the state-level must do a better job countering initiatives aimed at limiting abortion restrictions. 

“You got to do a better job on these referenda. I think of all the stuff that’s happened to the pro-life cause, they have been caught flat footed on these referenda and they have been losing the referenda,” DeSantis said, seemingly referencing the Ohio ballot measure that passed Tuesday enshrining a state constitutional right to abortion up until the point of fetal viability.

“A lot of the people who are voting for the referenda are Republicans who would vote for a Republican candidate. So, you got to understand how to do that,” he added. 

Former UN Ambassador Nikki Haley, who called herself “unapologetically pro-life,” said the abortion question is a “personal issue for every woman and every man.” 

Former United Nations ambassador Nikki Haley speaks during the third Republican presidential primary debate at the Knight Concert Hall in Miami, Florida, on Nov. 8, 2023.
AFP via Getty Images
“As much as I’m pro-life, I don’t judge anyone for being pro-choice, and I don’t want them to judge me for being pro-life,” Haley said. “So when we’re looking at this, there are some states that are going more on the pro-life side. I welcome that. There are some states that are going more on the pro-choice side. I wish that wasn’t the case. But the people decided.” 

The former Trump administration official also indicated that she would be open to signing federal legislation that would restrict access to abortions, but said she doesn’t see a path forward for that happening. 

“When it comes to the federal law …  be honest,” Haley said. “It’s going to take 60 Senate votes, a majority of the House and a president to sign it. So no, we haven’t had 60 Senate votes in over 100 years. We might have 45 pro-life senators. So no Republican president can ban abortions any more than a Democrat president can ban these state laws.”

From left to right — former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, former UN Ambassador Nikki Haley, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, Vivek Ramaswamy and Sen. Tim Scott are seen during the Republican Presidential Primary Debate.
Getty Images
Sen. Tim Scott (R-SC) was the strongest proponent of federal laws banning abortion, arguing in support of a 15-week national limit.  

“I would not allow states like California, Illinois or New York to have abortion up until the day of birth,” he said.  

“I would challenge both Nikki [Haley] and Ron [DeSantis] to join me at a 15-week limit. It is in our nation’s best interest. And frankly, I think it’s unethical and unethical and immoral to allow for abortions up until the day of birth,” he added, noting that he would also support federal funding for crisis pregnancy centers and promoting adoption. 

Abortion-rights protesters shout slogans and display banners after tieing green flags to the fence of the White House to pressure the Biden administration to act and protect abortion in Washington, DC.

Entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy encouraged more men to speak out against abortion and slammed the approval of the Ohio ballot measure as emblematic of the “Republican culture of losing.”  

“The Republicans did not have an alternative amendment or vision on the table,” he said. 

Ramaswamy then demanded “sexual responsibility for men,” calling it the “missing ingredient” in the pro-life movement. 

“We live in an era of reliable genetic paternity tests that are 100% reliable, so we can say men deserve more responsibility. So we can tell women, we’re all in this together. It’s not men’s rights versus women’s rights. It’s about human rights,” he argued. 

Former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie slammed efforts to implement federal restrictions on abortions, arguing that federal intervention will “short circuit” states and that there isn’t consensus among Republicans about what those restrictions should be.

“For 50 years conservative lawyers have been arguing that the federal government should have absolutely nothing to do with this issue constitutionally because it’s nowhere in the Constitution. And then [Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization] comes and we finally gain that victory,” he said.  

“And now we have people running to say, let’s short circuit the states from doing what they need to do. And let’s go right to some type of federal ban and a certain number of weeks, and people on the stage have been all over the place – 20 weeks, 15 weeks 12, 6,” he added. 

“We should not short circuit that process until every state’s people have the right to weigh in on it,” Christie said. 




Article: 30
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Adams inks deal to offer abortion pills at NYC clinics — sparking ‘tourism’ fears
Author: Carl Campanile
Publication_Date: Published Jan. 15, 2023 Updated Jan. 15, 2023, 4:43 p.m. ET
Article_Content: City-run health clinics will soon be able to provide “medical abortions” with pills to terminate a pregnancy — a move critics charge will turn New York into an abortion tourist mecca.

The city Department of Health and Mental Health, in a legal notice, said it intends to enter into a “sole source” contract with Nixon-Shane LLC/ R&S Northeast LLC., to buy 200 milligram mifepristone tablets — the abortion pill.

Mifepristone is used with another pill, misoprostol, to abort a pregnancy within the first 11 weeks of gestation.

In the public notice, the health department said it’s buying the abortion pill “to mitigate the threat to public health posed by the recent Supreme Court decision that overturned Roe vs Wade, which provided a constitutional right to abortion.” The nation’s high court ruling said states should determine legalization or restriction of abortion.

New York state had among the strongest abortion rights and access laws in the country even before Roe vs. Wade was struck down, with sweeping legislation approved in 2019. State lawmakers are now pushing for a constitutional amendment to protect abortion rights.

Mifepristone is not the same as the “morning after” pill, which is considered emergency contraception — and can have side effects.

The city's Department of Health and Mental Health announced that it will sign a deal to buy 200 milligram mifepristone tablets for "medical abortions."

The city’s Department of Health and Mental Health announced that it will sign a deal to buy 200-milligram mifepristone tablets for “medical abortions.”

“These are usually mild and last between a couple of days and two weeks. They can include cramping, spot bleeding and nausea/vomiting. If you are having more severe side effects, call your provider immediately,” the health department says in the “abortion hub” section on its website.

Opponents argue the city is looking to become an abortion tourist destination and pill mill as other states limit or ban abortion.

“Abortion is the killing of an innocent human life,” said Dennis Poust, executive director of the New York State Catholic Conference, which includes the Archdiocese of NY and Brooklyn-Queens Diocese.

“Abortion, unfortunately, is New York’s answer to everything concerning pregnancy. Abortion is promoted as a social good. Why won’t New York help pregnant women who wish to keep their babies bring them to term and escape poverty?”

State Conservative Party chairman Gerald Kassar fumed, “This is abortion tourism. New York has gone way too extreme on abortion.”

Mifepristone is used with the pill misoprostol to abort a pregnancy within the first 11 weeks of gestation.
Photo/Victor R. Caivano, File
“We respect the sanctity of life. We believe life begins at conception and government funds should not be used for abortion,”  he added.

City Hall defended stockpiling and providing medical abortion pills for women who want to terminate a pregnancy. 

“Mayor Adams and the Health Department have made no secret of their commitment to reproductive rights,” the Health Department said in a statement. “With New York state’s abortion protections codified, our city launched into action in support of residents from other states whose freedom of choice was once again restricted after the Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization ruling and doubled down on support for New Yorkers.”

The health department wouldn’t say how many abortion pills it’s buying to stock at its clinics — or how much the contract is for.

Adams signed a law passed by the City Council last year requiring the health department to offer federal medicine for medication abortions, at no cost to patients, at city-run health clinics, with $1 million made available to boost abortion access.

“I’m definitely supportive. Access to abortion is important,” said Upper West Siide Councilwoman Gale Brewer, a co-sponsor of the law to provide abortion pills at city clinics.

“Our city health clinics are a good place for patients that provide professional medical advice and counseling. The fact that the pills are being offer at the health clinics is a good thing.”

New York state had among the highest abortion rates in the country in 2020 among females 15 to 44 years old, with 110,0360 pregnancies terminated — 28.18 per 1,000, or double the national rate, according to a study by the Guttmacher Institute, a pro-choice group.

The city Health Department reported 49,784 abortions in 2019.

The decision to stock the pills at city-run health clinics has critics worried about “abortion tourism.”
The city reported the number of medical or non-surgical abortions — via pills — jumped 51.7% from 2010 to 2019, to 8.8 per 1,000 females of child bearing age as the pills became more available.

By comparison, the number of surgical abortions plummeted 50.9% to 18.4 per 1,000 females of child rearing age, the health department report said.

Gov. Hochul is requiring that abortion pills be stocked at SUNY and CUNY campuses.

“Students at SUNY and CUNY deserve comprehensive access to reproductive health care, including abortion services,” Hochul’s 2023 State of the State policy book stated. “That is why Governor Hochul will ensure all public colleges and universities in the SUNY and CUNY systems either offer medication abortion in their college health centers or establish a relationship with a local reproductive health care provider to directly refer students to a trusted facility for abortion services, an approach that will improve students’ access to abortion while allowing institutions to meet their needs in the way that best fits their campus infrastructure.”



Article: 31
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Trump says GOP midterm fail not ‘my fault,’ blames abortion, McConnell
Author: Mark Moore
Publication_Date: Published Jan. 2, 2023 Updated Jan. 2, 2023, 12:20 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Former President Donald Trump has again insisted that it “wasn’t my fault” Republicans failed to live up to “expectations in the MidTerms,” instead blaming the GOP’s purported mishandling of the “abortion issue.”

​”​It wasn’t my fault that the Republicans didn’t live up to expectations in the MidTerms,” the 76-year-old Trump said on his Truth Social platform Sunday evening. “I was 233-20! It was the ​’abortion issue,​’​ poorly handled by many Republicans, especially those that firmly insisted on No Exceptions, even in the case of Rape, Incest, or Life of the Mother, that lost large numbers of Voters​.

“Also, the people that pushed so hard, for decades, against abortion, got their wish from the U.S. Supreme Court, & just plain disappeared, not to be seen again​. Plus, Mitch stupid $’s!​” he added, referring to Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), whom Trump has repeatedly attacked since the Nov. 8 elections. Former President Donald Trump said Republicans failure to meet expectations in the midterm elections "wasn't my fault."

Former President Donald Trump said Republicans’ failure to meet expectations in the midterm elections “wasn’t my fault.”
Getty Images
Two days after the midterms, Trump disputed reports that he was angry over the poor Republican results, saying he was satisfied with how they turned out.

“For those many people that are being fed the fake narrative from the corrupt media that I am Angry about the Midterms, don’t believe it,” he said on Truth Social at the time. “I am not at all angry, did a great job (I wasn’t the one running!), and am very busy looking into the future.”

“Remember, I am a ‘Stable Genius,’” he added.

Former President Donald Trump's Truth Social posting about the 2022 midterm elections.

Former President Donald Trump’s Truth Social posting about the 2022 midterm elections.
Truth/@realDonaldTrump
​Republicans began pointing the finger at Trump immediately after Election Day, when a number of high-profile candidates endorsed by the 45th president lost their races — including Rep. Lee Zeldin in New York, Dr. Mehmet Oz in Pennsylvania, Kari Lake in Arizona and Herschel Walker in Georgia.

By contrast, most of the victories by Trump-endorsed candidates came in safe Republican states and House districts.

Republicans gained a narrow majority in the House, but Democrats retained control of the Senate — even picking up a seat against all expectations. Donald Trump pinned blame for the Republicans’ underwhelming performance in the midterm elections on Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell.

The GOP had anticipated a red wave, with polls showing President Biden’s favorability ratings hovering around 40%, annual inflation rates at four-decade highs, and rising crime across America.

But the Supreme Court’s June 24 decision overturning the landmark 1973 ruling in Roe v. Wade buoyed Democrats at the ballot box.  

Three of Trump’s Supreme Court appointees — Justices Brett Kavanaugh, Neil Gorsuch and Amy Coney Barrett — signed on to the opinion by Justice Samuel Alito. 

Trump-backed candidates like Oz and Walker stumbled when confronting the issue, and another endorsee — Pennsylvania gubernatorial candidate Doug Mastriano — previously backed a near-total abortion ban once a fetal heartbeat is recorded.

Oz asserted that abortion is “still murder” at any stage of pregnancy because “life starts at conception.”

Walker, the former NFL star, was left denying claims that he paid women to get abortions, despite campaigning on a pro-life platform. 

McConnell blamed the Republicans’ midterm flop on “candidate quality” issues, saying the party’s hands were tied in races with Trump-backed candidates who denied the results of the 2020 election.

“Our ability to control primary outcomes was quite limited in ’22 because the support of the former president proved to be very decisive in these primaries so my view was do the best with the cards you’re dealt,” ​the Kentucky Republican said ​last month.

“Hopefully in the next cycle, we’ll have quality candidates everywhere and a better outcome.”






Article: 32
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Supreme Court says it hasn’t identified who leaked draft of abortion opinion
Author: Samuel Chamberlain and Mark Moore
Publication_Date: Published Jan. 19, 2023 Updated Jan. 19, 2023, 5:31 p.m. ET
Article_Content: The Supreme Court admitted Thursday it has no idea who leaked a draft of the opinion overturning Roe v. Wade last year following an eight-month investigation that scoured the court’s computer system and interviewed nearly 100 employees.

Despite suffering what it called “one of the worst breaches of trust in its history,” the high court said the probe led by its marshal, Gail Curley, had been “unable to identify a person responsible by a preponderance of the evidence.”

In a 20-page report Curley found that it was “unlikely” the leak came from an outside actor — but noted that all 97 court employees interviewed had denied they were responsible.

“Despite these efforts, investigators have been unable to determine at this time, using a preponderance of the evidence standard, the identity of the person(s) who disclosed the draft majority opinion in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Org. or how the draft opinion was provided to Politico,” wrote Curley, who added that the investigation is continuing and “other inquiries remain pending.”

Chief Justice John Roberts ordered the investigation last May into the leak of the draft opinion by Justice Samuel Alito that led to the court overturning its 1973 landmark Roe v. Wade ruling legalizing abortion nationwide.

The Supreme Court said it hasn’t been able to figure out who the leaker was.

“This was a singular and egregious breach of that trust that is an affront to the Court and the community of public servants who work here,” Roberts said at the time.

The leak of the draft opinion sparked protests across the country by both pro-choice and anti-abortion activists.

Barricades were quickly erected in front of the Supreme Court building as demonstrators carried signs and chanted slogans outside.

In the weeks that followed, protesters would gather outside the homes of some of the justices who signed the decision, including Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett.

Police arrested a California man in June who said he had traveled to Kavanaugh’s home and intended to kill the justice and himself.

Curley’s investigation examined the court IT system’s operating logs to determine who had access to the draft opinion and discovered that “certain employees emailed the draft document to other employees, with approval.”

No evidence was found that the draft was emailed to anyone else, though Curley conceded that “technical limitations in the Court’s computer recordkeeping at the time made it impossible to rule out this possibility entirely.”

In all, the report said 80 court personnel received or had access to electronic copies of the opinion, and hard copies were also available.

It said 34 personnel printed out copies of Alito’s draft opinion, with some printing out more than one.

Investigators also collected employees’ court-issued laptop computers and cell phones, but found no “relevant information from these devices.”

During the course of the probe, 126 formal interviews were conducted with the 97 employees.

“The investigators informed all witnesses that they had a duty to answer questions about their conduct as employees; that disciplinary action including dismissal could be undertaken if they refused to answer or failed to answer fully and truthfully,” the report said.

Following the interviews, employees were asked to sign an affidavit, under penalty of perjury and signed by a Notary Public, that they did not disclose the Dobbs decision to anyone outside the court.

Some of the employees admitted informing their spouses about the opinion or the vote count in violation of the court’s confidentiality rules.

“The interviews provided very few leads concerning who may have publicly disclosed the document. Very few of the individuals interviewed were willing to speculate on how the disclosure could have occurred or who might have been involved,” Curley said in the report.

As part of the probe, investigators scrutinized relationships between court employees and reporters, as well as speculation that circulated on social media platforms but found “nothing to substantiate” the allegations.

“No one confessed to publicly disclosing the document and none of the available forensic and other evidence provided a basis for identifying any individual as the source of the document,” the report said, adding that investigators cannot entirely eliminate the possibility that it was an inadvertent disclosure because it “was left in a public space either inside or outside the building.”

Roberts also asked former Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff, a onetime New Jersey US Attorney and federal judge, to assess the investigation. Chertoff, in a statement issued through the court, described it as “thorough” and made four recommendations to prevent a similar leak in the future: limiting the distribution of “sensitive documents” via both hard copy and email, restricting access to such information on outside mobile devices, and more closely controlling who can use, edit and share such material.





Article: 33
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Mississippi rape victim, 13, gives birth after being unable to get abortion
Author: Olivia Land
Publication_Date: Published Aug. 15, 2023 Updated Aug. 15, 2023, 12:28 p.m. ET
Article_Content: A 13-year-old schoolgirl raped by a stranger was forced to give birth because of Mississippi’s abortion ban, according to a heart-wrenching new report.

The Clarksdale teen — identified by the pseudonym Ashley — gave birth earlier this summer to a baby boy she’s nicknamed Peanut, her family told Time.

Ashley was only 12 last fall when she says a stranger snatched her from her yard and raped her around the side of the house, her mother, Regina, told the magazine.

The then-sixth-grader did not tell anyone about the attack and did not learn she was pregnant until January, when she was taken to an emergency room for profuse vomiting.

She was so innocent, she did not even know how babies were made, according to her mom. The family found it impossible to get her a termination because of the bans enforced in Mississippi and most surrounding states following the Supreme Court’s ruling last year overturning the constitutional right to abortion. A 13-year-old girl in Mississippi recently gave birth after she was raped, impregnated, and then denied an abortion under strict state laws.
AP
Although Mississippi’s ban has an exception for rape, there are no providers left in the Magnolia State, which is already largely classified as a maternity care desert, according to the March of Dimes. 

Ashley’s mom said she was not even aware that Mississippi had an exception for rape.

The nearest provider was in Chicago — a nine-hour drive away. Her mom said it was impossible for her to take the time off work and pay for the gas, food and accommodations on top of the cost of the abortion.

“I don’t have the funds for all this,” Regina told Time. Abortion rights advocates posted supportive signs on the privacy fencing outside the Jackson Women’s Health Organization last year. The clinic was previously the only facility that performed abortions in the state. Abortion is a hot-button issue among right-wing activists and politicians.
Stefani Reynolds / CNP / SplashNews.com
“I wish [Ashley] had just told me when it happened. We could have gotten Plan B or something,” she continued.

“That would have been that.”

Ashley’s family kept her pregnancy under wraps. She finished sixth grade online, and will likely start seventh grade the same way, they said. Even the girl’s three school friends do not know about her baby, she told the outlet.

“We’ve been keeping it quiet, because people judge wrong when they don’t know what’s going on,” Regina noted.

“It’s going to be a little private matter here.”

When asked how she felt when she learned she was pregnant, Ashley said it was “not happy” news.

“This situation hurts the most because it was an innocent child doing what children do, playing outside, and it was my child,” her mom told Time just two days after Peanut was born.

“It still hurts, and is going to always hurt.”

Attempts to hold Ashley’s attacker accountable have also stalled, even after a family member thought they had identified the alleged rapist on social media, the outlet noted.

There have been no arrests, and police did not collect a DNA sample from Peanut for possible identification until pressed by Time, the outlet said. It’s a pretty high priority, as a juvenile,” insisted Clarksdale Police Chief Vincent Ramirez. 

“Sometimes they slip a little bit because we’ve got a lot going on, but then they come back to it.”






Article: 34
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: White House on Defense Department abortion policy: ‘It’s the darn right thing to do’
Author: Caitlin Doornbos
Publication_Date: Published July 17, 2023, 7:30 p.m. ET
Article_Content: WASHINGTON – National Security Council spokesman John Kirby on Monday made an impassioned speech defending the Pentagon’s policies that pay for troops’ and their families’ travel expenses to receive reproductive care — including abortion and in-vitro fertilization.

“One in five members of the US military are women,” Kirby said. “We’re an all-volunteer force … When you sign up and when you make that contract, you have every right to expect that organization – in this case, the military – is going to take care of you, is going to take care of your family.”

“Whether it’s about female service members or female family members, being able to count on the kinds of healthcare – and reproductive care, specifically – that they need to serve, that is a foundational sacred obligation of military leaders across the river,” he added.

Continuing his four-minute diatribe, Kirby told reporters at the White House that denying women and female dependents access to abortion and other reproductive care risks military readiness by discouraging individuals who need such care from enlisting or remaining in the armed services.

NSC spokesman John Kirby gave a speech defending the Pentagon’s policies that pay for the military and their families to receive reproductive care.

“We want to keep the people that we get, [and] want to make sure that they can continue to serve,” he said. “So it can have an extremely, extremely significant impact on our recruiting and retention – not to mention it’s just the right darn thing to do for people who raise their hand and agreed to serve in the military.”

Service members have little choice over where they live, given that the military assigns troops to position in various locations – including in states that have severely restricted or outright banned abortion after the Supreme Court last year overturned Roe v. Wade, Kirby said.

“You go where you’re told, that’s the way orders work. You’re assigned, you don’t get to choose,” Kirby said. “And so what happens if you get assigned to a state like Alabama, which has a pretty restrictive abortion law in place, and you’re concerned about your reproductive care? What do you do? Do you say no and get out? Well, some people may decide to do that.”

Since service members have little choice over where they live, the Pentagon also pays for their travel expenses to receive reproductive care.
AP
“And what does that mean? That means we lose talent,” he added.

The speech came as the Pentagon prepares to brief the Senate Armed Services Committee on its post-Roe policies later this week, according to Defense Department spokeswoman Sabrina Singh.

The briefing, which is expected to be closed to the public, will involve senior Pentagon policy officials as Sen. Tommy Tuberville (R-Ala.) continues to block more than 275 military officer confirmations in protest of the DOD abortion policy, she said.

The speech came as the Pentagon prepares to brief the Senate Armed Services Committee on its post-Roe policies later this week.

Tuberville’s protest, which has been going on since March, has caused the military to go without important leadership roles and blocked troops and their families from receiving promotions or moving on to new command posts.

Pressure has grown in recent weeks as the protest affected the office of the Marine Corps Commandant. As of last week, the service is without a top commander after former Commandant David H. Berger after retired on July 10.

While Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Eric Smith assumed Berger’s duties with the turnover, he cannot formally take over the role without the Senate confirming his nomination. Without confirmation, he is blocked from receiving benefits like personal security and barred from carrying out some official – and critical – duties, such as issuing a new strategic direction for the Corps.

That pressure is only expected to grow as Joint Chief of Staff Army Gen. Mark Milley is set to retire this fall.

If Tuberville continues his boycott, the nation could be left without a confirmed top military officer before the end of the year.





Article: 35
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Woman denied abortion in Texas vomits on the stand during gut-wrenching testimony on ban
Author: Allie Griffin
Publication_Date: Published July 21, 2023, 1:45 a.m. ET
Article_Content: A Texas woman who testified how she was denied an abortion despite her unborn child’s fatal condition vomited on the stand Wednesday while retelling the trauma she endured during her forced pregnancy and its aftermath.

Samantha Casiano got sick while testifying that she “felt like I was imprisoned in my own body” when she learned of her baby’s defect and was told she would have to continue her pregnancy and then bury her daughter hours after birth, NBC News reported.

Casiano is one of 13 women and two OB-GYNs who are suing the state of Texas over its abortion ban — one of the strictest in the country.

Three of the plaintiffs, including Casiano, gave heartbreaking accounts of the trauma they endured when they were denied abortions in the Lone Star State.

Casiano told the courtroom that she learned halfway through her pregnancy that her baby had anencephaly, a fatal condition in which the infant’s brain and skull did not fully form. She said she was told her daughter would not survive out of the womb and was given a pamphlet on funeral homes. “I felt like I was abandoned,” Casiano said. “I had this funeral home paper and this is just supposed to be a scan day.”

She read aloud the doctor’s note that determined her pregnancy was high-risk but began to sob and soon got so upset she threw up — something she said she never did before she was pregnant but does frequently now.

Casiano gave birth to her baby, whom she named Halo, early and watched her child die four hours later.

She said retelling the traumatic experience she went through puts her body back into those times “and it just reacts,” according to NBC.

“I now have a psychiatrist,” she reportedly said. “I now vomit a lot more. I’ve never vomited before like that, ever, before my pregnancy. My body’s never reacted that way.”

She read aloud the doctor's note that determined her pregnancy was high-risk but began to sob and soon got so upset she threw up -- something she said she never did before she was pregnant but does frequently now.

Casiano and her co-plaintiffs argue that the Texas law, which bans all abortions except in cases of serious risk of death to the woman, is too vague. They want the court to clarify which situations and conditions constitute a medical emergency.

The lead plaintiff in the suit filed in March, Amanda Zurawski, nearly died from pregnancy complications after she was denied an abortion due to the law.

She told the court through tears how she was unable to terminate her high-risk pregnancy and came close to death when she developed sepsis after her water broke at 18 weeks.

A third woman, Ashley Brandt, testified that she was pregnant with twins when she learned one of the babies had acrania, a fatal and untreatable defect. The longer the baby was in the womb with its twin, the more it jeopardized its sibling’s chance of survival, the news station reported.

She said retelling the traumatic experience she went through puts her body back into those times "and it just reacts," according to NBC.

Casiano and her co-plaintiffs argue that the Texas law, which bans all abortions except in cases of serious risk of death to the woman, is too vague.

The mom-to-be decided to get an abortion of the nonviable fetus in Colorado in order to save the other baby. She gave birth to a healthy baby girl at 38 weeks and said if she hadn’t crossed state lines for the procedure, she would have been forced to give birth to a daughter who had no shot at survival.

“I would have had to give birth to an identical version of my daughter without a skull and without a brain and hold her until she died,” Brandt said, according to NBC.

Attorneys for the women said the language of Texas’ abortion ban law has created fear and confusion among doctors over when they can legally end the pregnancies of women who are suffering health risk complications. They have asked the judge to issue a temporary injunction blocking the ban in cases of high-risk pregnancies.

Doctors who violate the state law face severe penalties — including the potential to lose their medical licenses, spending up to 99 years in prison and incurring fines of at least $100,000, according to the Center for Reproductive Rights which helped bring the lawsuit.

The mom-to-be decided to get an abortion of the nonviable fetus in Colorado in order to save the other baby.
The state’s attorney Amy Pletscher said the women “simply do not like Texas’ restrictions on abortion” and said the court’s job is “not to legislate.”

Following more testimonies, District Judge Jessica Mangrum will issue a decision on both the request for an injunction and the state’s request to toss the lawsuit altogether.

The women are the first to sue a US state over abortion access since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade and subsequent abortion bans in conservative-controlled states across the country.




Article: 36
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: More than half of Americans say abortion pills should be legal in their state: poll
Author: Victor Nava
Publication_Date: Published April 11, 2023 Updated April 11, 2023, 6:33 p.m. ET
Article_Content: More than half of Americans said in a recent survey that they believe abortion drugs should be legal in their state — as a judge in Texas moved to block its approval. 

A Pew Research Center poll released on Monday found that 53% of adults in the US said the use of a prescription pill or pills to terminate a pregnancy should be legal in their state. 

The findings come after conflicting federal court rulings last week over the legality of the abortion pill mifepristone, which has been FDA-approved for more than two decades.

The Pew Research Center survey, conducted from March 27 to April 2, before courts in Texas and Washington issued their rulings on medication abortion on April 7, also found that only 22% say prescription abortion drugs should be illegal and 24% were unsure. 

Unsurprisingly, the poll found a wide partisan divide on the issue of medication abortion – the most commonly used abortion method in the US.


A majority of Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents, 73%, believe medication abortion should be legal in their state, while only 35% of Republicans and GOP leaners say the same.

Pew also found notable ideological gaps within the parties, with almost half of conservatives, 47%, saying abortion pills should be illegal compared to only 20% of moderate and liberal Republicans who say medication abortion should be illegal. 53% of adults in the US said the use of a prescription pill or pills to terminate a pregnancy should be legal in their state. Federal lawyers representing the Food and Drug Administration are expected to swiftly appeal the Texas judge’s ruling.

Nearly nine-in-ten liberal Democrats, 88%, say the pills should be legal, compared with 59% of conservative and moderate Democrats, according to the poll. 

Overall, younger adults were more likely than older ones to say medication abortion should be legal in their state, with 66% of adults under 30 responding that abortion pills should be legal, compared with half of adults 30 and older.

Last week, District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk, an appointee of former President Donald Trump from Texas, ordered a hold on federal approval of mifepristone. District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk ordered a hold on federal approval of mifepristone. 
Minutes later, District Judge Thomas O. Rice, a Barack Obama appointee from Washington, barred authorities from restricting access to mifepristone in at least 17 states where Democrats sued to protect availability.

Federal lawyers representing the Food and Drug Administration are expected to swiftly appeal the ruling and the White House is reportedly reviewing the decision.





Article: 37
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Federal court rules abortion pill can remain legal — but adds key restrictions
Author: Jesse O’Neill
Publication_Date: Published April 13, 2023 Updated April 13, 2023, 11:03 a.m. ET
Article_Content: A federal appeals court Wednesday upheld the legality of the abortion pill mifepristone, but placed new limitations on its usage and effectively banned its distribution in more than a dozen states.

The ruling came after a lower Texas court had blocked the Food and Drug Administration’s approval of the nation’s most commonly used abortion method less than a year after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, and set the stage for the conservative-led high court to take up the mifepristone case.

Just before midnight Wednesday, the 5th US Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans ruled that the FDA’s approval of the pill in the year 2000 could remain in effect.

However, the court reduced the period of pregnancy during which it can be taken and banned it from being mailed to women in the states that had outlawed abortion in recent months.

The ruling came after a lone federal judge last week blocked the decades-long approval of mifepristone, which is used in combination with the drug misoprostol, after a lawsuit by opponents of the drug.

The Louisiana court that reversed the ruling in a 2-1 vote also suspended changes made by the FDA in 2016 that extended the period when the drug can be used from seven weeks to 10 weeks into a pregnancy and allowed the drug to be distributed by mail without a visit to a doctor.

A lone federal judge last week blocked the decades-long approval of mifepristone.

The two judges who voted to tighten restrictions are appointees of President Donald Trump.

The lone dissenter, an appointee of President George W. Bush, was inclined to put the lower court ruling on hold to allow for oral arguments.

In their decision, judges in the majority noted that both the White House and Danco Laboratories, the maker of the drug, “warn us of significant public consequences” if mifepristone was banned from the market.

The 5th US Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans ruled that the FDA’s approval of the pill in the year 2000 could remain in effect.
AP
The future of the case is now in limbo.

Either or both sides could take it to the Supreme Court, and opponents of mifepristone could move to keep the lower court ruling in effect.

The Biden administration could also ask the high court to keep the FDA changes in effect while the case continues to be adjudicated.

“We are going to continue to fight in the courts, we believe the law is on our side, and we will prevail,” White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre told reporters Thursday while in Ireland with President Biden.

Meanwhile, a separate federal judge in Washington last week ruled that the FDA could not make moves to block the accessibility of mifepristone in 17 blue states that had sued to keep it on the market.

Democratic Gov. Kathy Hochul said Tuesday that New York would stockpile 150,000 doses of misoprostol and the White House was also said to have contingency plans in place.

Jean-Pierre did not detail the administration’s backup plan amid the ongoing legal battle, instead discussing a new federal proposal that would limit the ability of officials to collect medical records of women who flee their home states to get an abortion.



Article: 38
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: NC Gov. Roy Cooper vetoes abortion limits bill in front of charged crowd
Author: Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published May 13, 2023 Updated May 13, 2023, 6:02 p.m. ET
Article_Content: In front of an exuberant crowd, North Carolina’s Democratic governor vetoed legislation Saturday that would have banned nearly all abortions in his state after 12 weeks of pregnancy.

About 1,000 abortion-rights activists and voters watched on a plaza in the capital of Raleigh as Gov. Roy Cooper affixed his veto stamp to the bill in an unconventionally public display.

The veto launches a major test for leaders of the GOP-controlled General Assembly to attempt an override vote after they recently gained veto-proof majorities in both chambers. 

The bill was the Republican response to last year’s U.S. Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade.

“We’re going to have to kick it into an even higher gear when that veto stamp comes down,” Cooper told the crowd. “If just one Republican in either the House or the Senate keeps a campaign promise to protect women’s reproductive health, we can stop this

Andrea Long, a 42-year-old mother of three from Cary, said she was honored be part of an “electric” crowd on what she called a “historic day for freedom” in North Carolina.

“I couldn’t stop crying tears of joy seeing the governor hold up the veto stamp, but I know it’s an uphill battle to keep this momentum going,” Long said.

Cooper, a strong abortion-rights supporter, had until Sunday night to act on the measure that tightens current state law, which bans most abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy.

The legislation passed along party lines last week in the House and Senate. 5
North Carolina Democratic Gov. Roy Cooper vetoed a republican abortion ban after 12 weeks of pregnancy in his state. North Carolina Attorney General Josh Stein, who is running for governor next year, speaks to abortion rights supporters from a stage with doctors shortly before Governor Roy Cooper vetoed the SB20 legislation.

Override voting could begin next week.

Cooper spent this week on the road talking to North Carolinians about the bill’s lesser-known impacts and urging them to apply pressure upon key Republican lawmakers who were hesitant about further restrictions during their campaigns for office last year.

Republicans have pitched the measure as a middle-ground change to state abortion laws developed after months of private negotiations between House and Senate GOP members.

It adds exceptions to the 12-week ban, extending the limit through 20 weeks for rape and incest and through 24 weeks for “life-limiting” fetal anomalies.
The Republican legislature could override the governor’s veto.
REUTERS
Senate leader Phil Berger accused Cooper on Saturday of “feeding the public lies” and “bullying” members of his party to block the legislation. “I look forward to promptly overriding his veto,” he said in a statement.

Cooper has said repeatedly the details contained in the 47-page bill show that the measure isn’t a reasonable compromise and would instead greatly erode reproductive rights. He cites new obstacles for women to obtain abortions — such as requiring multiple in-person visits, additional paperwork to prove a patient has given their informed consent to an abortion and increased regulation of clinics providing the procedure. Over 1,000 abortion rights protesters attended the rally where the governor vetoed the bill.
REUTERS
Cooper and allies have said those changes in practice will shut down clinics that cannot afford major upgrades mandated by new licensing standards and make it nearly impossible for women who live in rural areas or work long hours to access abortion services.

Compared to recent actions by Republican-controlled legislatures elsewhere, the broad prohibition after 12 weeks can be viewed as less onerous to those in other states where the procedure has been banned almost completely. But abortion-rights activists have argued that it’s more restrictive than meets the eye and will have far-reaching consequences. Since Roe was overturned, many patients traveling from more restrictive states have become dependent on North Carolina as a locale for abortions later in pregnancy.

Republicans call the legislation pro-family and pro-child, pointing to at least $160 million in spending contained within for maternal health services, foster and adoption care, contraceptive access and paid leave for teachers and state employees after the birth of a child. NC Gov. Roy Cooper called on abortion rights activists to apply pressure.
REUTERS
Cooper has called out four GOP legislators — three House members and one senator — whom he said made “campaign promises to protect women’s reproductive health.” Abortion-rights activists passed out fliers in the crowd Saturday with their names and office phone numbers. Anti-abortion groups accused Cooper of trying to bully them.

“The way he’s been showing up in their districts and harassing their constituents, it’s disgusting,” said Wes Bryant, one of about 70 anti-abortion protesters gathered across the street from Cooper’s rally for a prayer event.

One of the House members Cooper singled out is Rep. Tricia Cotham of Mecklenburg County, who voted for the bill mere weeks after she switched from the Democratic Party to the GOP. The move gave Republicans a veto-proof supermajority if all of their legislators are present and voting. Cotham has spoken out for abortion rights in the past and even earlier this year co-sponsored a bill to codify abortion protections into state law. Rep. Ted Davis of Wilmington — another targeted legislator — was the only Republican absent from last week’s initial House vote. The Senate margin already became veto-proof after GOP gains last November.

Davis said last fall that he supported “what the law is in North Carolina right now,” which was a 20-week limit. Davis has declined to comment on the bill, but House Speaker Tim Moore said recently that Davis is a “yes” vote for an override.





Article: 39
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Iowa faith leaders, DeSantis pan Haley over abortion policy ‘truth’
Author: Diana Glebova
Publication_Date: Published Nov. 20, 2023, 6:42 p.m. ET'
Article_Content: Prominent Iowa pastors joined Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis Monday in slamming Republican presidential candidate Nikki Haley for saying her stance on abortion was based on her “truth” instead of “God’s truth” at a forum last week.

Haley has taken a moderate stance on the abortion issue, arguing that Republicans should be “honest” about the slim chances of passing a nationwide ban on the procedure and instead focus on restricting late-term abortions and making contraception more widely available

“As much as I’m pro-life, I don’t judge anyone for being pro-choice, and I don’t want them to judge me for being pro-life,” the former ambassador to the United Nations said at the third Republican primary debate earlier this month. “Let’s find consensus … We don’t need to divide America over this issue anymore.”

Haley defended her remarks at Friday’s FAMiLY Leader Thanksgiving Forum in Iowa after CEO Bob Vander Plaats said her policies sounded pro-choice and not “unapologetically pro-life” as she has claimed to be.

“What you heard me say at the debate was very much my truth,” Haley responded. That prompted DeSantis to issue an attack on her use of the phrase “my truth” as the two White House hopefuls battle for support in the Hawkeye State.

“When you’re talking about my truth — no, it’s not your truth or this person’s truth, there’s the truth. And we’ve got to be grounded in the truth and not be involved in saying everyone has their own,” DeSantis said, arguing Haley’s answers on abortion did “not go over well with the crowd” in Iowa. Both DeSantis and Haley defended their abortion policies at the last GOP debate in Miami.

A Haley rep responded to the attack by calling DeSantis a “desperate” and “failed” candidate.

“Ron DeSantis and his PAC have spent $100 million only to see his support plummet. He’s a failed and desperate candidate whose attacks on Nikki Haley have fallen flat,” the spokesperson said.

“Nikki’s support in New Hampshire and Iowa continues to grow, as we saw on Friday when a major Iowa pro-life leader announced her Haley endorsement,” the Haley spokesperson added, referring to former executive director of the Iowa GOP and former executive director of Iowa Right to Life Marlys Popma endorsing Haley at a town hall in Newton.

DeSantis criticized Haley for saying she spoke “my truth” about abortion. Some Iowa faith leaders who have endorsed DeSantis voiced opposition to the “subjective” nature of the offending phrase.

“Truth is not subjective. There is not my truth and your truth. There is only God’s truth. Period. Failing to protect the lives of innocent babies is nothing short of ignorance of God’s truth and we cannot afford to elect a president who bases their stances on the political winds or their own opinions,” said Liberty Baptist Church Pastor Darran Whiting.

“Governor DeSantis doesn’t base his opinions on what he believes is ‘his truth.’ He knows that when it comes to saving life’s most vulnerable, there’s only one truth to stand on: God’s truth,” added Jon Dunwell, a pastor and Iowa state representative.

“We need leaders who will reject this growing ideology in America which claims we each decide what’s true and what’s not. God’s Word is the only decider of what’s true and right,” said Pastor Brad Cranston, founder and president of Baptists for Biblical Values. Haley was joined by DeSantis and Ramaswamy at the FAMiLY Leader Thanksgiving forum on Friday.
Getty Images
The rebukes of Haley’s abortion stance come as a recent Des Moines Register poll shows Haley and DeSantis tied at 16% among likely Iowa caucus goers. Another Des Moines Register poll shows 41% of likely Republican caucus goers saying abortion policies are “extremely important” in choosing who they would vote for, while 38% say it’s “important.” Haley has previously said she would be in favor of a 15-week federal abortion ban but has reiterated during her campaign that such a restriction would be near impossible to get through Congress. As South Carolina governor, Haley signed a 20-week abortion ban into law.

DeSantis signed a six-week statewide abortion ban as governor of Florida, and has also said he would be in favor of a federal abortion ban after 15 weeks of pregnancy.





Article: 40
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Ohio voters approve Issue 1 ballot measure, enshrining abortion rights in state
Author: Ryan King
Publication_Date: Published Nov. 7, 2023, 9:10 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Ohioans voted Tuesday night to make abortion rights part of the Buckeye State’s constitution, the latest in a string of defeats for pro-life activists at the ballot box.

With 60% of the expected vote in, the pro-abortion side led 56.1% to 43.9%, a margin of more than 280,000 votes out of more than 2.3 million cast. 

The ballot outcome illustrates the thorny nature of abortion politics for Republicans — even in solid red states — as they grapple with how to handle the issue ahead of next year’s presidential and congressional elections.

Issue One specifically asked voters if they wanted to amend the state constitution to guarantee a right to “make and carry out one’s own reproductive decisions, including but not limited to decisions on contraception, fertility treatment, continuing one’s own pregnancy, miscarriage care, and abortion.”

An effort led by Republicans to raise the threshold for approving the amendment to 60% from 50%-plus-one was soundly defeated in August of this year.
President Biden hailed the result late Tuesday, saying in a statement that “Americans once again voted to protect their fundamental freedoms – and democracy won.”

“Ohioans and voters across the country rejected attempts by MAGA Republican elected officials to impose extreme abortion bans that put the health and lives of women in jeopardy, force women to travel hundreds of miles for care, and threaten to criminalize doctors and nurses for providing the health care that their patients need and that they are trained to provide,” the president said. “This extreme and dangerous agenda is out-of-step with the vast majority of Americans. My Administration will continue to protect access to reproductive health care and call on Congress to restore the protections of Roe v. Wade in federal law once and for all.”

In a one-two punch to the gut of Ohio’s social conservatives, voters also backed legalizing marijuana for residents age 21 and older on a separate ballot question. 

After the Supreme Court’s June 2022 ruling overturning Roe v. Wade, many states — including Ohio — enacted so-called “heartbeat bills” all but prohibiting the procedure after the detection of a fetal heartbeat, which pro-life advocates say can occur around the six-week mark of a pregnancy.

Anti-abortion activists fought against the amendment, hoping to avert another political setback for the movement.
Ohio was the latest state to weigh in on the political proxy war over abortion sweeping the nation. Mike DeWine encouraged voters to oppose Issue One.

Ohio Republican Gov. Mike DeWine, who approved his state’s heartbeat bill and won re-election in a landslide last year, cut a TV ad opposing passage of Issue One alongside his wife Frances.

“I think whether you’re pro-choice or pro-life, the constitutional amendment that we will be voting on in a couple of weeks just goes way, way too far,” DeWine told Fox News Digital last month.

“It would allow abortion at any point in the pregnancy,” the governor insisted. “It would negate Ohio’s law that we’ve had on the books for many, many years that prohibits partial birth abortion … It also really strikes at parents rights and the relationship between a parent and in this case, a daughter.” Activists against Issue One argued that it would trample upon protections for the unborn.
AP
Since Roe was overturned, at least six other states — California, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan, Montana and Vermont — have voted on abortion ballot measures. In all of those states, the abortion rights side prevailed. 

Additionally, Republicans massively underperformed expectations in the 2022 midterm elections, something many political analysts pinned at least partly on backlash over the abortion issue.

A mélange of polling has also shown that the vast majority of voters nationally trust Democrats over Republicans on the issue of abortion. Protesters march in favor of Issue One, calling for abortion rights to be guaranteed in Ohio’s Constitution.
AP
A recent New York Times/Siena College poll showed that 62% of registered voters say that abortion should be “always” or “mostly” legal, while just 30% said the procedure should be “always” or “mostly” illegal.

Ohioans also overwhelmingly voted in favor of a second ballot measure legalizing marijuana, making it the 24th state to do so.

The measure will go into effect in 30 days and allow adults 21 and over to legally buy and possess up to 2.5 ounces of cannabis, along with an imposed 10% tax rate.

The legislation will also permit Ohioans to grow the marijuana plants at home.

The “yes” vote marks the end to a years-long struggle by activists to legalize non-medical cannabis use. 

Republicans generally oppose cannabis legalization and still have the ability to tweak or repeal the new law.



Article: 41
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Abortion doctors can’t be charged under Arizona law, new court ruling says
Author: Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published Dec. 30, 2022, 10:28 p.m. ET
Article_Content: PHOENIX — An Arizona court has ruled that abortion doctors cannot be prosecuted under a pre-statehood law that criminalizes nearly all abortions yet was barred from being enforced for decades.

But the Arizona Court of Appeals on Friday declined to repeal the 1864 law, which carries a sentence of two to five years in prison for anyone who assists in an abortion and provides no exceptions for rape or incest.

Still, the court said doctors can’t be prosecuted for performing abortions in the first 15 weeks of pregnancy because other Arizona laws passed over the years allow them to perform the procedure, though non-doctors are still subject to be charged under the old law.

“The statutes, read together, make clear that physicians are permitted to perform abortions as regulated” by other abortion laws, the appeals court wrote.

The pre-statehood law, which allows abortions only if a patient’s life is in jeopardy, had been blocked from being enforced shortly after the U.S. Supreme Court issued its 1973 Roe v. Wade decision guaranteeing women a constitutional right to an abortion.

Attorney General Mark Brnovich asked a state judge to allow the law to be implemented.

But after the Supreme Court overturned the landmark decision in June, Attorney General Mark Brnovich asked a state judge to allow the law to be implemented.

The Arizona Court of Appeals said it wasn’t viewing the pre-statehood law in isolation of other state abortion laws, explaining that “the legislature has created a complex regulatory scheme to achieve its intent to restrict — but not to eliminate — elective abortions.”

In a statement, Brittany Fonteno, president and chief executive of Planned Parenthood Arizona, said the decision means a state law limiting abortions to 15 weeks into a pregnancy will remain in place.
“Let me be crystal clear that today is a good day,” Fonteno said. “The Arizona Court of Appeals has given us the clarity that Planned Parenthood Arizona has been seeking for months: When provided by licensed physicians in compliance with Arizona’s other laws and regulations, abortion through 15 weeks will remain legal.”

The appeals court rejected Brnovich’s claim that doctors could be prosecuted under the pre-statehood law, saying the attorney general’s argument ignores the Legislature’s intent to regulate but not eliminate abortions and violates due process by promoting arbitrary enforcement.

“Brnovich’s interpretation would not merely invite arbitrary enforcement, it would practically demand it,” the appeals court wrote.

The attorney general’s office didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment on the decision, which was released late Friday afternoon. In a tweet, Attorney General-elect Kris Mayes, a supporter of abortion rights, said she agreed with the ruling that doctors cannot be prosecuted for performing the procedure in the first 15 weeks of pregnancy and vowed “to continue to fight for reproductive freedom.” Planned Parenthood Arizona restarted abortion care across the state again after Brnovich’s office agreed not to enforce the old law at least until next year.
AP
Abortion providers stopped providing the procedure in the state after Roe was struck down, restarted in mid-July after a “personhood” law giving legal rights to unborn children was blocked by a court, and stopped them again when a Tucson judge allowed the 1864 law to be enforced.

Planned Parenthood Arizona, the state’s largest provider of abortions, restarted abortion care across the state again after Brnovich’s office agreed in another lawsuit not to enforce the old law at least until next year.

A Phoenix physician who runs a clinic that provides abortions and the Arizona Medical Association also had filed a separate lawsuit that sought to block the territorial-era law, arguing that laws enacted by the Legislature after the Roe decision should take precedence and abortions should be allowed until 15 weeks into a pregnancy.

Brnovich sought to place that lawsuit on hold until the Court of Appeals decides the Planned Parenthood case. In an agreement with the abortion doctor and the medical association, he said he would not enforce the old law until at least 45 days after a final ruling in the original case.

A law enacted by the Legislature this year limits abortions to 15 weeks into a pregnancy, well before the 24 weeks generally allowed under the Roe decision that was overruled by the U.S. Supreme Court in June.

After the Roe decision was overturned and the issue of abortion was left up to the states, bans went into effects in some states.

Abortion is considered illegal at all stages of pregnancy, with various exceptions, in 13 states: Alabama, Arkansas, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Oklahoma, South Dakota , Tennessee, Texas, West Virginia and Wisconsin.

Bans in Arizona, Montana, North Dakota, Ohio, South Carolina, Utah and Wyoming are also not in effect, at least for now, as courts decide whether they can be enforced.





Article: 42
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Republicans must confront abortion issue ‘head-on’ to win swing voters in 2024: RNC chair
Author: Carl Campanile
Publication_Date: Published April 30, 2023, 4:12 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Republican candidates have to confront the abortion issue to win swing voters in 2024 following the drubbing the GOP got in 2022 for ducking the debate, party chairwoman Ronna McDaniel declared Sunday.

In June, US Supreme Court overturned 50-year-old case law legalizing a federal right to abortion, leaving the decision to the states — a ruling GOP candidates failed to prioritize while Democrats turned it into a rallying cry.

That can’t happen next year, she said.

“What I will say is, the biggest takeaway we are taking is that independents did not break our way, which has to happen if we’re going to win in 2024, which usually that’s what causes that red wave. And abortion was a big issue in key states like Michigan and Pennsylvania,” McDaniel said on Fox News Sunday while discussing last year’s midterms.

“And so, the guidance we’re going to give to our candidates is you have to address this head-on. The Democrats spent $360 million on this and many of our candidates across the board refused to talk about it, thinking, `oh, we can just talk about the economy and ignore this big issue’, and they can’t.”

Abortion was considered one of the issues that kept Republicans from winning back the Senate — and only retaking the House of Representatives by the slimmest of margins, McDaniel acknowledged.

She said Republicans can put Democrats on the defensive by painting them as extreme — and asking them if they support late-term abortion, which some abortion opponents consider infanticide.   

RNC Chair Ronna McDaniel joined ‘Fox News Sunday’ to discuss key issues ahead of the 2024 election.
FOX News
 “What abortion is a bad idea to Democrats? Ninth month, eighth month, seventh month? They can’t even articulate an abortion that’s a bad idea,” she said.

“Gender selection, if it’s a girl, you get to abort it? Tax-funded abortions for people where it’s against their religious conscience. That’s where Joe Biden was years ago. So I think put them on the defensive and articulate where you stand and that’s going to be that critical message that we have to get out .. .before 2024.”

In a sign the Supreme Court ruling galvanized pro-choice supporters, voters in conservative Kansas last August overwhelmingly rejected a proposed state constitutional amendment that would’ve outlawed abortion.

Also, McDaniel said it was important for presumptive GOP front-runner and former President Donald Trump and other candidates to participate in primary debates, and that all candidates should pledge to back the Republican nominee for the White House after a hard-fought primary. The US Supreme Court overturned 50-year-old case law legalizing a federal right to abortion. Abortion rights demonstrator Elizabeth White leads a chant in response to the Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization ruling in front of the U.S. Supreme Court.
Getty Images/Brandon Bell
She said unity is important for the Republicans to win back the White House, noting that President Biden and Democrats are trying to paint them as divided.

Trump has threatened to duck debates.

“I think one of the other takeaways we took from the midterms in 2022 is that we just don’t just need independents, we need every Republican,” McDaniel said. “And we need to bring every Republican together. We have states where Republicans wouldn’t vote for Republican nominees and that was a big factor of why we lost some key Senate races.”

She added Biden “was right” that “we cannot win if we’re not united. If Republicans don’t vote for other Republicans, we’re not going to win. And we don’t just need all of the Republicans, we need independents, too.” Abortion was considered one of the issues that kept Republicans from winning back the Senate according to McDaniel. Biden has sought to paint the GOP as dominated by Trump’s base, the so-called “MAGA [Make America Great Again) Republicans.”

McDaniel seemed less concerned about Democrats accusing Republicans like Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, another White House aspirant, of banning books, praising him and other Republicans for “protecting our children” from sexually explicit and inappropriate material.





Article: 43
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Trump ripped by right after calling DeSantis’ six-week abortion ban ‘terrible’
Author: Ryan King
Publication_Date: Published Sep. 18, 2023, 2:03 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Former President Donald Trump has drawn outrage from pro-life conservatives after he panned a six-week abortion ban championed by Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis as “terrible.”

“I think what he did is a terrible thing and a terrible mistake,” Trump, 77, told NBC’s “Meet the Press” when asked about the policy in an interview that aired Sunday.

The 45th president’s remarks triggered backlash among anti-abortion activists, including from groups like Live Action and Students for Life, which have pushed 2024 Republican presidential hopefuls to stand firm on the issue following the Supreme Court’s overturning of Roe v. Wade last year.

“Pathetic and shameful. Trump is actively attacking the very pro-life laws made possible by Roe’s overturning,” Lila Rose of Live Action said on X, formerly known as Twitter. “Heartbeat Laws have saved thousands of babies. But Trump wants to compromise on babies’ lives so pro-abort Dems ‘like him.’ Trump should not be the GOP nominee.”

“Hey @realDonaldTrump, protecting human life at 5 or 6 weeks isn’t a ‘terrible thing’ … it’s the right thing,” added Kristan Hawkins, president of Students for Life.

Donald Trump has encouraged Republicans to refrain from taking a position on abortion that’s too restrictive.
Getty Images
The Susan B. Anthony List, which has pushed candidates to call for a national abortion ban — and criticized candidates like DeSantis who have declined to do so — initially had a tame response to Trump.

“We’re at a moment where we need a human rights advocate, someone who is dedicated to saving the lives of children and serving mothers in need. Every single candidate should be clear on how they plan to do that,” Marjorie Dannenfelser, SBA president, said in a statement.

“Anything later than a 15 week protection for babies in the womb (when science proves they can feel pain) as a national minimum standard makes no sense.”

DeSantis signed Florida’s Heartbeat Protect Act in April, banning the procedure after detection of a fetal heartbeat, which proponents of tighter restrictions say can happen as soon as six weeks into a pregnancy.

That law has been stymied in court pending litigation over the state’s previous 15-week ban, but state justices appeared amenable to it during a hearing earlier this month. The six-week bill notably made exceptions to the ban for instances of rape and to protect the life of the mother.

The DeSantis campaign was quick to fire back at Trump Sunday morning. Ron DeSantis has sought to cast himself as unapologetically anti-abortion.
AP
“We’ve already seen the disastrous results of Donald Trump compromising with Democrats: over $7 trillion in new debt, an unfinished border wall, and the jailbreak First Step Act letting violent criminals back on to the streets,” communications director Andrew Romeo posted on social media.

“Republicans across the country know that Ron DeSantis will never back down.”

Trump famously appointed three justices to the Supreme Court during his term in office, all of whom voted in favor of overturning Roe in the case Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. States have begun enacting abortion restrictions now that Roe v. Wade has been overturned.

The abortion issue galvanized Democratic voters in the 2022 midterms, leading — along with poor performances by Trump-backed candidates — to better-than-expected performances by President Biden’s party.

“It wasn’t my fault Republicans did not live up to expectations in the MidTerms,” Trump moaned on Truth Social back in January.

“It was the ‘abortion issue,’ poorly handled by many Republicans, especially those that firmly insisted on No Exceptions, even in the case of Rape, Incest or Life of the Mother, that lost large numbers of Voters.” Polls indicate that the public generally wants abortion access legal.

With an eye on the general election, DeSantis has argued that states should have the “primary jurisdiction” on abortion and insisted he wants to make promises he can keep.

To enact a strict national ban, Republicans will likely need to win 60 seats in the Senate as well as hold on to the House of Representatives — a prospect which is unlikely given the current polarized nature of politics.

“What’s going to happen, this is an issue that’s been going on for a long time. And it’s a very polarizing issue,” Trump told NBC’s Kristin Welker on Sunday. “Because of what’s been done, and because of the fact we brought it back to the states, we’re going to have people come together on this issue.”





Article: 44
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Nebraska teen Celeste Burgess gets 90 days behind bars for late-term abortion
Author: Olivia Land
Publication_Date: Published July 20, 2023 Updated July 20, 2023, 1:11 p.m. ET
Article_Content: The Nebraska teen who underwent an illegal, late-term abortion and tried to dispose of the fetus has been sentenced to three months behind bars.

Celeste Burgess, 19, of Norfolk, was hit with a 90-day sentence and two years’ probation at Madison County District Court on Thursday, News Channel Nebraska Central reported.

Her sentence may be reduced to closer to 50 days “due to the possibility of good time,” Andrew Nelson of Courthouse News said.

Burgess pleaded guilty in May to removing, concealing, or abandoning a dead body.

As part of the plea deal, prosecutors removed two misdemeanors from her charges, News Channel Nebraska Central said. She faced up to two years in prison. Celeste Burgess, 19, was sentenced to 90 day in jail on Thursday.

The teen and her mother, Jessica Burgess, 42, were charged with multiple felonies last August for attempting to carry out an illegal late-term home abortion and then trying to burn and bury the fetus.

Norfolk police were initially tipped off in April 2022 that Celeste had given birth to a stillborn baby in a bathtub, court documents said at the time.

Burgess, who was only 17 at the time of the alleged incident, later told investigators that she had a miscarriage and disposed of the fetus with her mother’s help. Nebraska passed a ban on abortions past 12 weeks gestation in May 2023.

When police unearthed the makeshift gravesite in a field, they found the infant’s remains with “thermal injuries,” the documents said.

A search of the mother and daughter’s Facebook messages eventually revealed a plan to perform a home abortion and destroy the evidence.

Burgess even told her mother “how she can’t wait to get the ‘thing’ out of her body,” according to the original court write-up. Jessica Burgess, 42, also pleaded guilty to charges related to the April 2022 abortion.

In another message, Jessica told her daughter that she had the abortion pills and told her how to end the 29-week pregnancy.

As of May 2023, abortions past 12 weeks gestation are illegal in Nebraska.

Jessica Burgess pleaded guilty earlier this month to providing an abortion after 20 weeks, false reporting, and tampering with human skeletal remains. Celeste Burgess was initially charged with multiple felonies in August 2022. In addition to Burgess and her mother, a third person, 22-year-old Tanner Barnhill, pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor for helping the women bury the fetus on his parents’ land.

He received a misdemeanor.






Article: 45
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Now pro-life, Donald Trump Jr. wanted Republicans to ‘drop’ abortion fight in 2012
Author: Selim Algar
Publication_Date: Published May 17, 2023 Updated May 22, 2023, 12:41 p.m. ET
Article_Content: Donald Trump Jr. has changed his tune on abortion.

The vocally pro-life son of former President Donald Trump — who now serves in a key advisory role to his father — told commentator Dave Rubin in 2012 that Republicans should give up their anti-abortion fight.

“I don’t understand how you can tell someone what they can or can’t do,” Trump Jr. told Rubin during an appearance on the conservative host’s former podcast.

“I can’t buy into the abortion argument,” he added. “I wish the Republicans would drop it as part of their platform.”

“Abortion, I don’t get it. I don’t even understand how it’s a political issue,” Trump Jr. went on. “I don’t understand how there’s one-issue voters for that.”

The comments have resurfaced after the elder Trump, 76, attacked his potential 2024 Republican primary rival, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, on the issue in recent days.

Notably, the former president panned Florida’s new law banning most abortions after six weeks of pregnancy, telling the Messenger in an interview published Monday that “many people within the pro-life movement feel that that was too harsh.” Donald Trump Jr. had said he couldn’t “buy into the abortion argument.”
Getty Images
DeSantis fired back Tuesday: “Protecting an unborn child when there is a detectable heartbeat is something that probably 99% of pro-lifers support.”

“I think that as a Florida resident, you know, he didn’t give an answer about, ‘Would you have signed the heartbeat bill that Florida did?’ It had all the exceptions that people talk about. The legislature put it in. I signed the bill. I was proud to do it. He won’t answer whether he would sign it or not,” the governor added.

Trump Jr., meanwhile, has changed his views on abortion since the 2012 interview, tweeting pro-life statements and taking particular aim at late-term abortions. The former president’s son also said he didn’t understand one-issue voters.
MediaNews Group via Getty Images
“Abortion supporters are doing everything in their power to end preborn lives by advocating for abortion from the moment of conception UP UNTIL BIRTH!,” he wrote in January. “Wherever you are on the issue we can all agree that’s insane & way too far. Demand lawmakers protect life.”

A spokesperson for DeSantis declined to comment on the apparent change of heart.

Andy Surabian, a rep for the former first son, said Trump Jr.’s earlier views were influenced by his environment.

“Years before Don began engaging in politics, his views on abortion were largely shaped by his upbringing in liberal New York City, but no different than conservative heroes like Ronald Reagan and millions of other converts, he now proudly considers himself to be pro-life,” Surabian told The Post Wednesday. Trump has criticized a restrictive Florida abortion law as “too harsh.”
AFP via Getty Images
A source close to Trump Jr. told The Post his perspective began to change after doctors urged him to abort one of his kids who showed early signs of Down Syndrome. The test turned out to be a false positive, and the experience made him question the practice.

While some Republicans have argued that taking a hard line on abortion could become a political vulnerability, DeSantis has instead leaned into his position as a marker of his conservative bona fides. While hitting the 45th president for his abortion stance Tuesday, DeSantis pointedly noted that key early voting state Iowa adopted the same six-week ban.

The Florida governor is expected to announced his presidential candidacy in the coming days.





Article: 46
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: 6 arrested after protesters hurl tampons at Nebraska lawmakers before passage of abortion ban
Author: Patrick Reilly
Publication_Date: Published May 20, 2023, 2:31 a.m. ET
Article_Content: At least six protesters were arrested at the Nebraska Capitol Friday as state lawmakers approved a 12-week abortion ban and restrictions on gender-affirming care for those under the age of 19.

Debate over the controversial bill has been so intense that lawmakers on both sides of the aisle said that they may no longer be able to work together in the future.

A single bill including both measures was finally passed after conservative legislators called in a visibly sick colleague so they would have enough votes to end a filibuster and get the bill through.

Friday’s heated debate was briefly halted when protesters in a chamber balcony hurled obscenities at conservative lawmakers and threw what appeared to be bloody tampons onto the floor.

Nebraska State Police arrested at least six of the demonstrators. Later, as lawmakers began voting, hundreds of protesters who’d packed in the Capitol rotunda chanted “Shame!” right outside of the chamber doors. Brenna Thompson of Lincoln protests against LB 574 at the rotunda, on May 19, 2023, at the Nebraska state Capitol in Lincoln, Neb.

The bill passed by a single vote.

Omaha state Sen. Megan Hunt, who revealed in March that her teenage son is transgender, said Friday that she now plans to leave the state.

Following the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe. v. Wade, which had federally protected abortions since 1973, 14 conservative states have imposed new restrictions on abortions —- including North Carolina, where its own 12-work abortion ban was passed by legislators this week before it was vetoed.

Nebraska’s 12-week ban includes exceptions for rape, incest and when necessary to save the life of the mother.

Nebraska state Sen. Megan Hunt, center, stands among supporters minutes after a vote in which the Nebraska Legislature passed a bill to ban abortion at 12 weeks and ban gender-affirming care in minors, on May 19, 2023 in Lincoln, Neb.

Opponents unsuccessfully sought an exception for fatal fetal anomalies and to explicitly protect doctors from criminal charges for performing a contested abortion.

The other measure on the bill would prevent trans individuals under the age of 19 from receiving any gender-confirming surgery and restrict the use of hormone treatments and puberty blockers.

Additionally it puts the state’s politically appointed chief medical officer — who is an ear, nose and throat doctor — in charge of establishing rules for those therapies.

In Nebraska, people younger than 19 are considered minors.

GOP Gov. Jim Pillen, who has supported the bill, has promised to sign it into law when it reaches his desk.

Nebraska’s restrictions on gender-affirming care wouldn’t take effect until Oct. 1, however the abortion ban will take effect as soon as the governor signs it. 

Opponents promised to sue to stop both measures.

Sen. Kathleen Kauth, who authored the trans health measure, has repeatedly referred to an increase of children who identify as transgender as “a social contagion,” and insisted the measure was to protect children from doing something they could later regret

Nebraska state Sen. Machaela Cavanaugh stands among her supporters just after a vote in which the Nebraska Legislature passed a bill to ban abortion at 12 weeks and ban gender-affirming care in minors, on May 19, 2023 in Lincoln, Neb.

“It does not mean by any stretch of the imagination that we hate them,” she said. “Quite to the contrary: We love them.”

In response to Kauth’s bill, Omaha Sen. Machaela Cavanaugh and other progressives organized a filibuster, introducing amendment after amendment to every bill that made it to the Senate floor, forcing leaders scrambling over which bills to push through first.

On Friday, Cavanaugh vowed to continue her filibuster until the end of this year’s session in early June and even through all of 2024.

“This place is morally bankrupt,” Cavanaugh told her colleagues. “I’m looking forward to 2025 when I no longer have to serve with many of you.”

Conservatives in Nebraska’s officially non-partisan Legislature announced their plan to slip in the abortion restriction measure into the trans health bill as an amendment after a previous abortion ban failed to advance.

The move took opponents off guard, sparking complaints that conservatives essentially created a new bill without public hearing.

They also claim it violates state law that requires amendments to be related to the underlying bill.






Article: 47
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: NYC college professor Shellyne Rodriguez cursed out anti-abortion students tabling at school
Author: Allie Griffin
Publication_Date: Published May 22, 2023 Updated May 24, 2023, 9:31 a.m. ET
Article_Content: A Manhattan college professor flipped out on a group of students who set up an information table opposing abortion inside the school building — cursing and tossing their pamphlets, video of the interaction shows.

Shellyne Rodriguez, an adjunct professor, told the pro-life students they were “triggering” her students by tabling inside Hunter College in Manhattan earlier this month.

The footage was posted to Twitter by Students for Life of America.

“You’re not educating s–t. This is f–king propaganda,” the art professor told the students tabling on May 2. “What are you going to do like anti-trans next?”

A male student behind the table calmly told her, “I mean no, we’re talking about abortion” and said he was sorry about “triggering” her students.

Rodriguez claimed their demonstration was “violent” and yelled at the male student behind the table that he wasn’t sorry “because you can’t even have a f–king baby,” the video shows.

Shellyne Rodriguez said the pro-lifers were being “violent” by setting up the table and handing out literature.
Rutgers University

Rodriguez, an adjunct professor, shouted at the pro-life students that they were “triggering” her students.

She then pushed the anti-abortion materials off the table toward the students while exclaiming “f–k this s–t” and walked off, according to the footage.

Hunter College, a public college that is part of the city’s CUNY program, confirmed that Rodriguez works at the school and said it is aware of the altercation in a statement to Fox News.

A spokesperson for the college told the outlet that Hunter was “taking this matter very seriously.”  Rodriguez told the pro-life students that they didn't know what they were talking about before pushing their literature off the table.

Rodriguez told the pro-life students they didn’t know what they were talking about before pushing their literature off the table.

A representative for the school said Hunter College as opened an investigation into the professors actions.

Hunter College says it is aware of the altercation involving the professor.

“The provost has opened an investigation into the professor’s actions,” the rep said.

It’s unclear what preceded the interaction before the video begins.

The PSC Graduate Center, a labor union chapter representing CUNY professors and graduate assistants, said it stands by Rodriguez “against right-wing anti-abortion backlash” and added that her actions were justified.

The center said the pro-life students “set up a table and prominent banners to propagate dangerously false propaganda.”

“Her actions to shut down the tabling were fully justified, and are part of a long and celebrated CUNY legacy of confronting groups such as military recruiters who disseminate misleading information,” the group said in a letter of support.





Article: 48
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Pharmacy accidentally gives abortion pills to patient undergoing IVF: ‘They just killed my babies’
Author: Alex Mitchell
Publication_Date: Published Oct. 5, 2023, 6:54 p.m. ET
Article_Content: A Las Vegas woman who underwent in vitro fertilization was left heartbroken after a CVS pharmacy accidentally gave her her abortion pills that took the lives of her unborn children.

Timika Thomas, a mother of four who previously had her fallopian tubes removed, recalls that she began “cramping really bad” when issued Misoprostol instead of doctor-prescribed vaginal suppositories in 2019, she recently told station KLAS.

“I started cramping really bad … My cramping went beyond that … It was extreme. It was painful,” Thomas said.

After taking two doses, the IVF patient checked the bottle she was given from the North Vegas pharmacy.

“The first thing I read is it’s used for abortions,” she added.

“They just killed my baby … Both my babies, because I transferred two embryos.”

The Nevada TV station reported that it had obtained documents outlining that it was two technicians along with two pharmacists responsible for the fatal error.

Tamika Thomas was devastated to learn a pharmacy error cost her two embryos.

It was shown that one technician misunderstood the generic name for the brand Thomas’ doctor had prescribed her and had entered the incorrect name into the prescription.

A pharmacist failed to spot the error and another did not counsel Thomas at the time she retrieved the pills, according to the KLAS.

“It [the error] would have been caught because then they would have had to have the medicine in their hand,” Thomas said. “And they would have said, ‘Oh, this is Misoprostol or Cytotek, have you taken this before?’ And I would have said, ‘No.’ ”

After complaining to the Nevada State Board of Pharmacy, the two pharmacists faced fines and provisionally lost their licenses — ones which can be reinstated over the next year.

“It’s a human error,” one of the pharmacists testified. “It was just a human error, and I’m so sorry.”

CVS was also fined a statute max of $10,000 for the incident.

“We’ve apologized to our patient for the prescription incident that occurred in 2019 and have cooperated with the Nevada Board of Pharmacy in this matter,” CVS said to the TV station in a statement.

“The health and well-being of our patients is our number one priority and we have comprehensive policies and procedures in place to support prescription safety. Prescription errors are very rare, but if one does occur, we take steps to learn from it in order to continuously improve quality and patient safety.” Thomas said she was given abortion-inducing Misoprostol by mistake.

Now, four years later, the scar remains open for Thomas and her family.

“All I got was a sorry,” the grieving mother said.





Article: 49
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Biden’s DOJ recommends no jail time for abortion activist who vandalized church, assaulted worker
Author: Mark Moore
Publication_Date: Published April 13, 2023 Updated April 13, 2023, 10:43 a.m. ET
Article_Content: President Biden’s Justice Department is recommending no jail time for an abortion activist who scrawled “F–k Catholics” on a church’s walls, assaulted a church employee and defaced several religious statues in reaction to the Supreme Court overturning Roe v. Wade last summer, according to a report. 

The Justice Department put forward a plea agreement, reviewed by Fox News Digital, that calls for three years’ probation and no jail time for Maeve Nota, who was arrested June 28, 2022, for vandalizing the St. Louise Catholic Church in Bellevue, Washington. 

Nota, a transgender man, was charged with a hate crime and assault for vandalizing the church, and tossing rocks at and spray-painting an employee of the church, according to the Bellevue Reporter.

Nota smashed two of the church’s glass doors, defaced religious statues and painted “women haters,” “kid groomers,” “we hate gay people,” “rot in hell,” and “F–k Catholics” on the church’s walls, the newspaper reported, citing charging documents.

“The graffiti painted on church walls and artifacts was anti-Catholic,” the Bellevue Police Department said ​at the time on Twitter​​​​. “​[A] hate crime includes acts that ‘Defaces religious real property with words, symbols, or items that are derogatory to persons of the faith associated with the property.’”

​Some contrasted the Biden Justice Department’s plea deal in Nota’s case with its response to pro-life activist Mark Houck, who was arrested in September 2022 after being indicted on federal charges that he intimidated people at a Planned Parenthood facility in Philadelphia.  Prosecutors say Maeve Nota vandalized a Catholic church, assaulted a church employee and defaced religious statues after the Supreme Court’s ruling overturning Roe v. Wade last June.
Prosecutors said he pushed a 72-year-old man who was escorting two patients from the clinic on Oct. 13, 2021.

Houck — who claimed that the elderly man had been harassing his son — was charged ​with violating the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act. ​

“It is very clear that the Biden Justice Department has politicized and weaponized the FACE Act to go after pro-life Christians praying outside of abortion clinics like Mark Houck while turning a blind eye to violent felons terrorizing and badly damaging Catholic churches like Maeve Nota,” Mike Davis, founder of the Article III Project, ​a nonprofit that advocates for conservative justices, ​told Fox News Digital.

“The Biden Justice Department tried to put Houck in prison for 11 years for defending his son while recommending no jail time for Nota after this deranged trans terrorist badly damaged a Catholic church, fought with the police, assaulted a church employee, and scared the hell out of a little old lady praying,” Davis said. A smashed window at the St. Louise Catholic Church in Bellevue, Wash. Prosecutors say Maeve Nota vandalized the church after the Supreme Court’s ruling overturning Roe v. Wade.
H​ouck was acquitted by a federal jury in January. ​

​In Nota’s case, the Justice Department in March charged him with destruction of religious property, a misdemeanor that can result in a one-year prison sentence and $100,000 in fines, Fox News Digital reported, citing court filings.

Then, a week later, the outlet reported that the Justice Department in the plea agreement with Nota’s lawyers will recommend three years’ probation but no jail time when he is sentenced June 2. 







Article: 50
News_Outlet: NYP
Title: Texas woman allowed to get abortion despite state’s ban after winning landmark suit
Author: Associated Press
Publication_Date: Published Dec. 7, 2023, 1:46 p.m. ET
Article_Content: AUSTIN, Texas — A Texas judge on Thursday gave a pregnant woman whose fetus has a fatal diagnosis permission to get an abortion in an unprecedented challenge over bans that more than a dozen states have enacted since Roe v. Wade was overturned. The lawsuit by Kate Cox, a 31-year-old mother of two from the Dallas area, is believed to be the first time since the landmark Supreme Court decision last year that a woman anywhere in the country has asked a court to approve an immediate abortion. It was unclear how quickly or whether Cox would receive the procedure. State District Judge Maya Guerra Gamble, an elected Democrat, said she would grant a temporary restraining order that would allow Cox to have an abortion under what are narrow exceptions to Texas’ ban. That decision is likely to be appealed by the state, which argued that Cox does not meet the criteria for a medical exception. In a brief hearing Thursday, her attorneys told Gamble that Cox, who is 20 weeks pregnant, went to an emergency room this week for a fourth time during her pregnancy. Cox and her husband both attended the hearing via Zoom but did not address the court. A Texas judge permitted Dallas mother Kate Cox to receive an abortion due to pregnancy complications. Doctors have told Cox that if the baby’s heartbeat were to stop, inducing labor would carry a risk of a uterine rupture because of her prior cesarean sections and that another C-section at full term would endanger her ability to carry another child. “The idea that Ms. Cox wants so desperately to be a parent and this law may have her lose that ability is shocking and would be a genuine miscarriage of justice,” Gamble said. The Center for Reproductive Rights, which is representing Cox, has said this lawsuit is believed to be the first of its kind since Roe v. Wade was overturned. Since that landmark ruling, Texas and 12 other states rushed to ban abortion at nearly all stages of pregnancy. The Texas Attorney General’s office is expected to appeal the decision by State District Judge Maya Guerra Gamble. Opponents have sought to weaken those bans, including an ongoing Texas challenge over whether the state’s law is too restrictive for women with pregnancy complications. “I do not want to continue the pain and suffering that has plagued this pregnancy or continue to put my body or my mental health through the risks of continuing this pregnancy,” Cox wrote in an editorial published in The Dallas Morning News. “I do not want my baby to arrive in this world only to watch her suffer.” Although Texas allows exceptions under the ban, doctors and women have argued that the requirements are so vaguely worded that physicians still won’t risk providing abortions, lest they face potential criminal charges or lawsuits. State officials had asked Gamble to deny the request, arguing that Cox has not shown her life is in imminent danger and that she is therefore unable to qualify for an exception to the ban. “There are no facts pled which demonstrate that Ms. Cox is at any more of a risk, let alone life-threatening than the countless women who give birth every day with similar medical histories,” the state wrote in court filings ahead of Thursday’s hearing. Spokespersons for Republican Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton did not immediately return messages addressing whether the state will appeal. Cox’s attorneys have argued that the risks to her health will worsen unless the courts act swiftly. The decision was handed down just two days after Cox filed the lawsuit, which says doctors told her the baby would likely be stillborn or live for a week at most. Cox had cesarean sections with her previous pregnancies. She learned she was pregnant for a third time in August and was told weeks later that her baby was at high risk for a condition known as trisomy 18, which has a very high likelihood of miscarriage or stillbirth and low survival rates, according to the lawsuit. The lawsuit was filed a week after the Texas Supreme Court heard arguments about whether the ban is too restrictive for women with pregnancy complications. That case is among the biggest ongoing challenges to abortion bans in the U.S., although a ruling from the all-Republican court may not come for months. Texas passed a ban on abortion in most cases after Roe v. Wade was overturned by the Supreme Court. In July, several Texas women gave emotional testimony about carrying babies they knew would not survive and doctors unable to offer abortions despite their spiraling conditions. A judge later ruled that Texas’ ban was too restrictive for women with pregnancy complications, but that decision was swiftly put on hold after the state appealed. More than 40 women have received abortions in Texas since the ban took effect, according to state health figures, none of which have resulted in criminal charges. There were more than 16,000 abortions in Texas in the five months before the ban taking effect last year.











