Article: 1
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Could Abortion Rights Rescue Red-State Democrats in the Senate?
Author:  Michael C. Bender and Anjali Huynh
Publication_Date: Nov. 29, 2023
Article_Content: Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio is seen as one of the most vulnerable Democrats in the chamber, with three Republicans vying to unseat him next year. In the opening minutes of a debate during Sherrod Brown’s successful 2006 campaign for Senate, the Republican incumbent attacked him over “partial-birth abortion,” a phrase often weaponized by conservatives at the time to paint Democrats as somewhere between immoral and murderous. Mr. Brown, a Democrat from northeast Ohio in the House at the time, glanced at his notes. He opposed “late-term abortion,” he said in a measured voice. He denounced the mere idea that Congress would limit any procedure that could “save a woman’s health.” With that, he quickly pivoted. Mr. Brown used the rest of his time to burnish his political brand as a blue-collar economic populist. Nearly 18 years later, abortion will again be a central point of contention as Senator Brown fights for re-election against one of three Republicans trying to unseat him next year. One difference, other than that his shaggy dark hair is now shaded with gray, is that he is preparing to fully lean into his defense of abortion rights. “This issue’s not going away,” Mr. Brown said in an interview. “Women don’t trust Republicans on abortion, and they won’t for the foreseeable future — and they’re not going to trust these guys running against me.” Since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade last year, abortion rights has become an invaluable political asset for Democrats. They have leveraged the issue to hold onto control of the Senate, limit losses in the House and, this month, fuel victories in key state races across the Midwest and the South. But perhaps the toughest test for the issue’s power will come in Senate contests like Mr. Brown’s in Ohio and Senator Jon Tester’s in Montana. The fate of the razor-thin Democratic majority in the chamber could well be sealed in those two places, by the same voters who have installed Republicans in every other statewide office. Senator Jon Tester of Montana talking to reporters, smiling and gesturing with his arms wide. Senator Jon Tester of Montana, like Mr. Brown, has often focused on local issues in his campaigns, rather than dominant national ones like abortion. So far, voters even in conservative states have consistently prioritized abortion protections over their partisanship. That was true last year in Kansas, where 59 percent of voters rejected a measure to remove abortion rights protections from the State Constitution, and again this month in Ohio, where 57 percent of voters agreed to enshrine such rights in their Constitution. The open question is whether Mr. Brown, 71, and Mr. Tester, 67, can maintain their invaluable political personas while — for the first time in their lengthy careers in public office — persuading their constituents to keep abortion rights front and center when voting next year. Politics Across the United States A Troubling Accusation: Details of a sexual assault allegation against the chairman of the Florida Republican Party in an affidavit from state authorities are fueling turmoil within the party. The chairman has denied any wrongdoing. A Key Issue: Will the issue of abortion rights help red-state Democrats like Senators Sherrod Brown of Ohio and Jon Tester of Montana win re-election in 2024? The party’s razor-thin majority in the upper chamber may depend on it. Pennsylvania’s Mail-In Ballots: A federal judge in Pennsylvania ruled that mail-in ballots that are received on time but are undated should be counted. The decision could have national implications heading into the 2024 election. ‘No Labels’: The centrist organization that is vying to gain ballot access for the 2024 presidential election, has joined forces with Javier Palomarez, an advocate of Hispanic-owned businesses with a history of allegations of workplace financial misconduct and sexual harassment. Both Democrats have long supported abortion rights, but their electoral successes trace back to carefully tailored campaigns that catered to local issues over dominant national ones like abortion. That individuality was how both men won re-election in 2018, even though their states voted for Donald J. Trump in 2016 and 2020. For Mr. Tester, this has meant campaigning on policies he has focused on in the Senate, where he serves on committees overseeing agricultural, Native American and veterans issues. His first television ads this campaign strike similar tones. One features Mr. Tester — a paunchy former schoolteacher with a flattop haircut and a left hand missing three fingers from a boyhood accident with a meat grinder — describing himself as both physically and philosophically different from his congressional colleagues. “I may not look like the other senators,” Mr. Tester says, “but that’s not stopping me from making Washington understand what makes Montana so special.” In Ohio, Mr. Brown has built his reputation on middle-class economic issues, including fighting corporate tax breaks and the high cost of health care. In a 2004 book, “Myths of Free Trade: Why America Trade Policy Has Failed,” he argued that unregulated trade deals had reopened the country’s class divide. This year, Mr. Brown’s campaign has already released a video attacking his three potential Republican challengers as extreme on abortion. In Montana, the Democratic Party has taken a similar approach on behalf of Mr. Tester. “The thing I think a lot of people miss with Sherrod is that he knows abortion is an economic issue,” said Nan Whaley, a Democratic former mayor of Dayton, Ohio, who ran for governor last year. “Abortion rights and abortion access maybe wasn’t discussed as much in previous campaigns, but that’s because it was before the fall of Roe.” Frank LaRose, the secretary of state of Ohio, sitting at a desk and talking in a sunlit room. A piece of artwork in the shape of Ohio is on the wall in front of him. Frank LaRose, the secretary of state of Ohio and one of the Republicans running against Mr. Brown, has supported a national abortion ban. The task for the two Democrats will be complicated by a political headwind that neither senator has confronted: seeking re-election on a ballot topped by an unpopular president from their own party. Both first won election to the Senate by unseating incumbents in 2006, when discontent over the Iraq war and Republican corruption scandals helped Democrats make gains in Congress. Each was re-elected in 2012, when Democrats scored huge majorities from Black and Hispanic voters as President Barack Obama won a second term. They won again in 2018, a Democratic wave year propelled by opposition to Mr. Trump. Republicans are already trying to massage their message on abortion. The National Republican Senatorial Committee is coaching candidates to oppose a national abortion ban and to clearly state their support for exceptions when it comes to rape, incest or a woman’s health. But not all Republicans are on board, as the party’s Senate primary race in Ohio shows. One top candidate, Frank LaRose, the Ohio secretary of state, has supported a national ban and opposed exceptions for rape and incest — and also unsuccessfully campaigned against the abortion ballot question. Another contender, Bernie Moreno, a businessman seeking his first elected office, has said he supports exceptions for rape, incest and the life of the woman, but he told a reporter from Breitbart News last year that he did not. He has also expressed support for a 15-week federal ban. Matt Dolan, a Republican state senator, walking in between houses as he knocked on voters’ doors in 2022. Matt Dolan, a Republican state senator in Ohio who is also running against Mr. Brown, opposes a national abortion ban. The third leading candidate, Matt Dolan, a state senator, opposed the state’s constitutional amendment this month, but he has a more moderate record on the issue than his opponents. Mr. Dolan opposes a national ban, though he has said he is willing to reconsider that stance. He has criticized abortion ban proposals in Ohio that haven’t included the three main exceptions. “Most Americans agree there should be reasonable limits on abortion and abortion policy will primarily be made at the state level,” Mr. Dolan said in a statement, adding that Mr. Brown held “extreme” views on the issue. Some Republicans have said that Ohio’s ballot referendum means the abortion issue will have less urgency in the state next year. But Democrats contend that Republican support for a federal ban would help keep the issue alive, arguing that such a measure would undermine the will of Ohio voters. A poll commissioned by the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee recommended that messaging focus on G.O.P. support for a “national abortion ban” and that politicians should not be involved in “personal medical decisions.” Abortion rights groups have encouraged candidates to simultaneously adopt a “proactive” platform that calls for expanding access to contraception and maternal health resources while highlighting Republican involvement in abortion restrictions. “Campaigns need to quickly define who the villains are here: Republicans overturned Roe, Republicans have been campaigning against Roe for decades, Republicans have been pledging to create a court that would overturn Roe,” said Mini Timmaraju, the president of Reproductive Freedom for All, one of the country’s largest abortion rights groups. “They got it, they did it, they’re responsible. Pin it on them. Do not flinch.” Neither Mr. Brown nor Mr. Tester has been shy about supporting abortion rights. Mr. Tester campaigned in 2018 with Cecile Richards, who had recently stepped down as the president of Planned Parenthood. He said recently that abortion rights had clear resonance in Montana, where libertarian-leaning voters tend to reject perceived government intrusion. Still, Mr. Tester has mostly tailored his campaigns around issues closer to the Continental Divide in his state than the partisan divide in Washington. A group of mostly women, some of them wearing green shirts that say Vote Yes, raising their hands and cheering. Supporters celebrating in Columbus this month after Ohio voters enshrined a right to abortion in the state’s Constitution. Mr. Brown won his first political office in 1974, the year after Roe v. Wade was decided. He has proudly highlighted his 100 percent voting score from Planned Parenthood Action Fund and Reproductive Freedom for All. “My focus has always been on civil rights and women’s rights,” he said. “That leads to a better economy, too — when women have better access to child care and can make decisions for their families.” Mr. Brown was involved in the campaign this year to support the constitutional amendment on abortion, phone-banking alongside the Ohio Democratic Party and frequently bringing up the measure during campaign events. Hours after Ohioans voted, Mr. Brown posted a video on social media that framed his three potential Republican challengers as sitting on the wrong side of the issue. “All of my opponents would support a national abortion ban,” the caption read. If there was any doubt, Mr. Brown made clear in the interview that he saw the political benefit of the issue. Abortion, he said, “will surely be talked about more than in my other races.”






Article: 2
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Texas Woman Asks Court to Allow Her Abortion
Author: J. David Goodman
Publication_Date: Dec. 5, 2023
Article_Content: A woman who is 20 weeks pregnant, and whose fetus has been diagnosed with a deadly condition, is suing for an abortion under a medical exception to the state’s bans. An abortion rights march near the Texas State Capitol in Austin, Texas, last year. A pregnant Texas woman whose fetus has a fatal condition sued the state on Tuesday seeking an emergency court order to allow her doctor to perform an abortion, despite the state’s strict bans on the procedure. The lawsuit is believed to be one of the first attempts in the nation to seek a court-ordered abortion since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade last year, allowing states to make their own abortion laws. Texas is at the forefront of states that restrict abortion, and has overlapping bans that outlaw abortions from the point of fertilization and allow private citizens to sue others who might help a woman obtain an abortion. The laws allow some exceptions to save the health and life of the pregnant woman, though abortion rights advocates argue that they are unclear, putting women with pregnancy complications at risk. The vagueness of the exceptions in Texas have prevented doctors from performing the procedure in most cases, lawyers for the woman, Kate Cox, have argued. A decision in her case could force the state to more clearly define what is allowed under the law. Ms. Cox is 20 weeks pregnant, and her fetus has been diagnosed with trisomy 18, a condition that in all but very rare cases leads to miscarriage, stillbirth or the death of the infant within the first year after birth. Despite trips to the emergency room for pain and discharge, Ms. Cox, 31, a mother of two young children who lives in the Dallas area, has been told by doctors that she is required to continue her pregnancy under Texas law. “Essentially, it was, as long as the baby has a heartbeat, there was nothing you could do in Texas,” said Ms. Cox in an interview on Tuesday. 
Her emergency appeal comes as the Texas Supreme Court is weighing a broad effort by abortion rights advocates and women who have been denied abortions to compel state officials to clarify the medical situations in which doctors can perform abortions without fear of civil or criminal penalties. That suit was filed in March by the Center for Reproductive Rights, which is also representing Ms. Cox. A district court judge ruled in their favor over the summer, shielding doctors from prosecution for providing abortions under a range of circumstances, including when pregnancy complications create a health risk, or when the fetus is unlikely to survive. But the Texas attorney general, Ken Paxton, appealed, putting the district court ruling on hold for now. The case, Zurawski v. State of Texas, could be decided by the state’s highest civil court in the coming weeks. But unlike that court proceeding, which seeks a ruling to apply broadly to future medically necessary abortions in Texas, Ms. Cox is currently pregnant and asking the court to intervene immediately to allow an abortion in her case. Such cases have been extremely rare. Mary Ziegler, a professor and legal historian at the University of California, Davis, School of Law said she was not aware of a similar case being brought since the decision to overturn Roe v. Wade. “Usually the stories of court ordered abortions were people who did not want abortions,” she said, citing past cases. “Women or pregnant people pursuing relief in this way are pretty unusual.” Ms. Cox’s lawyer, Molly Duane, said she was not aware of another suit like hers filed. “It’s not so easy, in the middle of a health care crisis, to reach out to a lawyer and file a lawsuit,” she said. Ms. Cox contacted the Center for Reproductive Rights after seeing news about arguments in the Zurawski case on the same day as she received her diagnosis. Ms. Cox’s suit is seeking to protect her doctor, Damla Karsan, from prosecution, as well as her husband, Justin, who could face civil liability under the state’s 2021 abortion restriction, known as Senate Bill 8, which allows private citizens to sue those who have assisted others in obtaining an abortion after detection of fetal cardiac activity, usually around six weeks. The state also has a trigger ban, which went into effect after the U.S. Supreme Court decision, and a separate, more-than-a-century-old abortion ban that Mr. Paxton has said he would also enforce. The suit was filed in Travis County district court against the state of Texas, Mr. Paxton and the Texas Medical Board. “Our contention is that Kate falls within the medical exemption, but her doctors can’t proceed and give her the medical care that she needs unless and until a court agrees,” Ms. Duane said. “Otherwise,” she added, “her doctor will risk life in prison, loss of her medical license and hundreds of thousands of dollars in fines.”  Mr. Paxton’s office and the medical board did not respond to requests for comment. In an interview, Ms. Cox said that she and her husband had been excited at the prospect of a third child joining their 3-year-old daughter and 1-year-old son. The couple only glancingly followed the rapidly shifting legal landscape around abortion in Texas as Roe was overturned and bans went into effect. “I thought I would never need an abortion,” she said. “I want a big family.” “We knew abortion was illegal in Texas,” Mr. Cox said, but not how limited the exceptions were. “We had no idea the scope of that.” The diagnosis of trisomy 18 was devastating, Ms. Cox said, because it meant that the fetus would not survive until birth, or, if carried to term, the infant would die within a short time. That feeling was compounded, she said, by her inability to end the pregnancy despite her doctors telling her that continuing it could endanger her own health. Ms. Cox delivered her previous pregnancies by C-section, and doctors have told her that the risk of scarring from a third C-section could threaten her chances of having another child. “It’s deep sadness,” she said. “I feel like I should not have to put my body through the risks of continuing this pregnancy through a childbirth and induction with a chance of uterine rupture, a third C-section.” Texas officials, including Gov. Greg Abbott and other proponents of the state’s strict abortion bans, have said that the bans already allow for doctors to perform abortions in cases where the mother’s life is at risk. But, the suit argues, state officials have not clarified what sorts of situations would constitute such a risk, leaving doctors — who must record every abortion they perform under the exception — fearful of going outside of its bounds and facing serious penalties, which include prison sentences of up to 99 years and fines of at least $100,000. According to the suit, during the Zurawski case, lawyers for the state said that an abortion could be performed if a patient had received a fatal fetal diagnosis and was facing serious health risks, as the suit argues is the case with Ms. Cox. “But the state defendants have never said what evidence nor what condition would be enough,” according to the complaint, discouraging action by the doctors. State officials have argued that women who do not receive proper care — such as an abortion permitted under the exceptions — could sue their doctors. But Ms. Cox said she felt well cared for by her doctor, and stymied by the state.





Article: 3
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Newsom-DeSantis Debate DeSantis and Newsom Slug It Out on Fox, With Very Different Goals
Author: Shane Goldmacher, Jonathan Weisman, Nicholas Nehamas, Shawn Hubler, Reid Epstein, Maggie Haberman,  James Poniewozik, Angelo Ficher, Adam Nagourney, Jonathan Swan
Publication_Date: Published Nov. 30, 2023, Updated Dec. 6, 2023
Article_Content: Ron DeSantis was more aggressive than he had been with his G.O.P. primary rivals. Gavin Newsom debated like he had nothing to lose. Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida, left, and Gov. Gavin Newsom of California have presented themselves as the new avatars of their respective ideologies. Newsom and DeSantis clash in a combative, unusual debate. [Coverage on this live blog has ended. Read the key takeaways from the event.] Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida and Gov. Gavin Newsom of California sparred in a surprisingly lively debate on Fox News, disagreeing over taxes, immigration, crime, guns, abortion and Covid in a clash that felt at times like an alternate-reality interlude during the 2024 presidential race. Mr. Newsom used the platform to burnish his standing as a future national figure for the Democratic Party while Mr. DeSantis took swings at his Democratic counterpart with the kind of unrestrained verve that has been missing from his Republican primary debate performances. The clear goal for Mr. DeSantis was to reinvigorate his flagging candidacy against the front-runner, former President Donald J. Trump. “By the way, how’s that going for you, Ron?” Mr. Newsom snapped. Mr. DeSantis forced a smile but didn’t speak, as Mr. Newsom continued, “You’re down 41 points in your own home state.” Mr. Newsom had predicted that the debate, moderated by Sean Hannity, the conservative anchor, would amount to a two-on-one contest. That proved mostly true as Mr. Hannity prefaced numerous questions with an array of statistics that presented Florida in a more favorable light than California. At times, the debate devolved into stretches of unintelligible cross talk, but the two men’s disdain was apparent as Mr. DeSantis called Mr. Newsom “slick” and “slippery” and Mr. Newsom said at one point, “You’re nothing but a bully.” Here are some highlights: Mr. DeSantis flashed the tough-guy persona he built during the first term of his governorship but that has been mostly missing from his presidential primary run. It felt as if he threw nearly as many sharp elbows at Mr. Newsom in the very first minute as he has at Mr. Trump in the first three Republican debates combined. “You almost have to try to mess California up,” Mr. DeSantis said, citing net migration out of the state and later invoking Mr. Newsom’s in-laws as among those who have moved to Florida. One of the fiercer sparring sessions came over their governance during the pandemic. “You should apologize for not getting your kids in school,” Mr. DeSantis told Mr. Newsom about school closures. Mr. Newsom tried to attack Mr. DeSantis from different directions almost simultaneously — both for reopening his state against the guidelines of health authorities, causing what he said was excess deaths, but also for following that guidance early on. “You were the shutdown governor,” Mr. Newsom said. The two men disagreed sharply over abortion. Mr. Hannity tried to make Mr. Newsom state that he was not in favor of any restrictions on abortions, even in the final months of pregnancy. Mr. Newsom pressed Mr. DeSantis to say whether he would sign a six-week national abortion ban like the one he put into law in Florida. Mr. DeSantis wouldn’t answer, which Mr. Newsom said amounted to a clear yes. Mr. Newsom repeatedly defended President Biden, both his agenda and his mental state. Mr. DeSantis said Mr. Biden was in clear decline and argued that Mr. Newsom would privately agree. “That’s why he’s running his shadow campaign,” Mr. DeSantis said. Mr. Newsom asked Mr. DeSantis why he wouldn’t drop out to give Nikki Haley a better shot at taking down Mr. Trump. “She laid you out,” Mr. Newsom said toward the end of the debate. Earlier, Mr. Newsom unfurled one of the evening’s more memorable lines on that topic. “We have one thing in common,” Mr. Newsom said, “neither of us will be the nominee for our party in 2024.” “This was really state versus state,” Hannity says, as if Newsom and DeSantis were dueling chambers of commerce. For most Americans, Florida and California are still essentially two places with nice beaches and Mickey Mouse. To show how little the Biden campaign cares about DeSantis at this point — there wasn’t a single press release attacking anything he said during tonight’s debate. Newsom also had a good night. He went into a traditionally hostile environment and is emerging unscathed. There was one topic I didn’t hear come up from him: Trump’s efforts to subvert the 2020 election. All of the Trump-free Republican primary debates have been pretty low-stakes, but this event was probably the lowest-stakes event of them all. DeSantis did have a good night, especially considering where he’s been. I’m just not sure that it does anything for him in the race he’s actually in right now. “Florida is ranked No. 1 [in education] by U.S. News & World Report. In terms of state education rankings, California ranks 20th. … You spend more money and they have better results in Florida, why?” — Sean Hannity, Fox News Host This requires context. Schools automatically get the lion’s share of state funding in California, with extra going to those with more low-income students, foster youth and English learners. Newsom has pumped a lot of extra money into public schools, where much of it has gone into salaries and pensions for the unionized teachers who have staunchly backed him. … annnnnd after the break, Hannity somewhat sheepishly announces that the candidates couldn’t stick around for the full two hours, bringing the not-quite-presidential debate to an end. Newsom with the true zinger: “When are you going to drop out and give Nikki Haley a shot to win” the Republican presidential nomination? DeSantis’s tendency to get deep in the weeds does not serve him well in this exchange over Israel. Newsom is unequivocal that Hamas “is a terrorist organization and they need to be eliminated.” He then pivots to accusations that DeSantis has stayed too quiet about antisemitism in his own state. Hannity is asking about the Israel-Hamas war for first time. Ron DeSantis has brought multiple graphic visual aids with him to the debate. If he were a book, I’m not sure whether he would be allowed in a Florida school library. “So extreme is your [abortion] ban that criminalizes women and criminalizes doctors.” — Gov. Gavin Newsom of California This requires context. Earlier this year, Mr. DeSantis signed a measure banning abortions after six weeks of pregnancy — before most women know that they are pregnant, as Mr. Newsom said. But the claim that it “criminalizes women” is not established. The governor and his campaign have called that claim a “lie” and Mr. DeSantis has repeatedly said that is not the intent. But there’s some ambiguity in the law’s language. Specifically, the law makes it a third-degree felony for “any person who willfully performs, or actively participates in, a termination of pregnancy” in violation of the new restrictions. Some critics of the law say the phrase “actively participates” could hypothetically be used to try to punish women, even if Mr. DeSantis says that is not the intent. State lawmakers have proposed legislation to explicitly state that the law can’t be used to criminally charge the pregnant woman for receiving the abortion. The six-week ban provides for an exception if the mother’s life is at risk and also permits abortions until 15 weeks for pregnancies that resulted from rape, incest or human trafficking, as long as the woman provides certain documentation. The law will not take effect unless the Florida Supreme Court upholds an earlier law banning abortions after 15 weeks, which is being challenged. The cross-talk here makes this mostly unintelligible. Hannity is just letting them yell over each other in the final moments. “You’re nothing but a bully,” Newsom says. The question Newsom got from Hannity about Biden’s age and ability to be president, regardless of how loaded it was, is something Democratic surrogates are going to hear versions of when the campaign begins in earnest next year. Newsom himself is a Tesla owner. DeSantis notes that California will ban the sale of new gasoline-powered cars by 2035. Do voters think Biden’s aim is to bring “rolling blackouts” across the country, regardless of what they think about his policies? Newsom is again invoking the argument that Trump’s team and others have made against DeSantis: that he does not have a consistent ideological core and makes political calculations with most of what he does. Newsom has hugged Biden tight throughout this debate, giving him an A grade for his presidency so far and asserting that Biden will be the Democratic nominee. Of course, saying anything short of that would land like a neutron bomb in his party at this stage of the campaign. Allegations of Biden’s “cognitive decline” were introduced not by the Democratic governor or the Republican governor, but by the ostensibly nonpartisan moderator, Sean Hannity, who started with, “Joe Biden has experienced significant cognitive decline.” Newsom did not engage with a Hannity question about whether Biden has suffered any cognitive decline and would not entertain a hypothetical in which Democratic delegates asked him to replace Biden at the party’s national convention next summer. Newsom on Biden’s age: “I would take Joe Biden at 100 over DeSantis at any age.” The Newsom-to-camera statement on the potential of DeSantis signing a six-week ban on abortion as president was an example of Newsom making the Democratic case better than the White House has, so far. Newsom keeps asking DeSantis if he’d sign a national six-week abortion ban. DeSantis dodged and Hannity let him off the hook by moving on to other questions. This month, with abortion a key wedge issue among Republican women, Newsom’s Campaign for Democracy PAC released an ad slamming Florida’s six-week ban on abortion, which was signed by DeSantis. The Heartbeat Protection Act makes some exceptions for patients whose lives are at risk or who are rape victims, but it holds women, who often do not know they are pregnant at six weeks, to some of the nation’s strictest legal standards and punishes violations as felonies. Worth noting here that abortion rights activists were energetic footsoldiers in helping Newsom crush the Republican-led 2021 attempt to recall him. Newsom, asked about abortion, is making a stalwart defense of what has become the universal Democratic position on abortion post-Dobbs: that the choice should be left to a woman and her doctor, period. Newsom, like others, refused to engage with the question of at what stage of a pregnancy the procedure should be banned by a government. Maggie, I’m guessing Newsom did himself some good with fellow Democrats by schooling DeSantis on how to refer to the vice president. Newsom, whose relationship with Kamala Harris has been a focus of coverage over time, corrects DeSantis for mispronouncing her first name. Hannity is playing hardball with Newsom and playing T-ball with DeSantis. But oddly, this may have put more focus on the Democrat than on the candidate who shares Hannity’s politics. And same talking points. This debate is repetitive. Same questions and discussions over and over. “When he was in Congress, he supported amnesty.” — Gov. Gavin Newsom of California This is misleading. While in Congress, Mr. DeSantis did vote for an immigration bill in 2018 that aimed to reduce immigration and would have offered a three-year renewable legal status to Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals recipients — which some conservatives argued was a form of amnesty. The same year, however, Mr. DeSantis voted against another bill that some on the right also criticized as “amnesty” for a provision offering a pathway to citizenship for the so-called Dreamers. The Briggs Initiative, which would have barred openly gay teachers in public schools, was defeated in California because Ronald Reagan, then the governor, came out against it. Newsom is right, it was a big moment in California history. The way Newsom just turned to say to DeSantis, “I don’t like the way you demean people” felt like a flash of his genuine feelings. That is quite the argument from DeSantis that the federal government should dictate to local public school districts what materials should be available to students. It was not so long ago that Republicans subscribed to the mantra of local control of schools and government. Hannity to DeSantis’s rescue again, this time on banned books. One of the most potent drivers of out-of-state migration in California is housing costs. As for Californians leaving “in droves,” to be clear, there are still 39 million people in California. And the outflow to Florida last year wouldn’t fill the Florida Gators’ football stadium. DeSantis has already denigrated San Francisco as a pit of homelessness, crime and drugs. Now he’s taking on the second-largest city in the country, Los Angeles. “That city has collapsed,” he said. “That county has collapsed.” Newsom tells DeSantis to not “insult a great American city,” Los Angeles, for saying criminal justice has collapsed there. Newsom actually is not slick in person. He tends to be pretty sincere and nerdy. According to census figures, the cross-migration between California and Florida has been teeny. About 29,000 Floridians moved to California last year, according to newly released census figures. About 51,000 Californians moved to Florida. That’s about 0.13 percent of the population of each state. DeSantis also keeps using words like “slick” and “lie” in talking about Newsom. DeSantis keeps using the line about people leaving California “in droves. Have any questions from Hannity yet been tough or critical of Florida or DeSantis? On crime, the two governors are arguing different — and selective — facts. Newsom is stressing gun deaths, which he said were much higher in Florida. DeSantis is looking more broadly at violent crimes, but also petty crimes like rampant shoplifting. “They basically legalized retail theft,” he said. “Florida had a lower standardized Covid death rate than California did. … California had higher excess mortality than Florida.” — Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida This is misleading California’s Covid policies were among the nation’s strictest, closing many schools and workplaces and mandating vaccines for school and health-care workers. Florida kept schools and workplaces open and although Mr. DeSantis emphasized vaccination early, he later reversed course and signed a bill forbidding employers to mandate vaccines. “People are leaving in California in droves, largely because public safety has collapsed.” That’s probably a stretch. One of the initiatives that helped raise Newsom’s political profile in California was a 2015 ballot measure to expand background checks for ammunition purchases and ban large-capacity magazines. Recently he began a similar national initiative, formally proposing a long-shot amendment to the U.S. Constitution to prohibit the sale of assault weapons and require universal background checks, a waiting period and a minimum age of 21 for gun purchases. California has some of the toughest gun-control policies in the nation, and they have kept Californians safer than in most states.
Both Florida and California have endured tragic histories with mass shootings, however, and Florida passed a package of gun reforms after the massacre of 17 people at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in 2018. Since then, though, DeSantis has signed legislation letting Florida gun owners carry concealed weapons without a government-issued permit. California’s homicide rate is significantly lower than Florida’s, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, at 6.4 per 100,000 population in 2021 versus 7.4 in Florida. San Francisco’s murder rate is exceptionally low, even in California. “He is the first governor to ever lose population. They actually at one point ran out of U-Hauls in the state of California because so many people were leaving.” — Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida This is misleading. California is the most populous state in the nation, with some 39 million people. Florida has about 22 million, but it is gaining people. California’s population has been leveling off for some time and even dipped a little during the pandemic. A key driver? Housing costs. Florida’s Covid age-adjusted death rate in 2021 was 111.7 deaths per 100,000 people, according to the C.D.C. California’s was significantly lower at 99.9. DeSantis got a good line in against Newsom, saying he didn’t mind him lying to DeSantis but did mind him lying “to you,” meaning voters. This event is Exhibit A for why political debates should always be held without an audience. There are no interruptions for applause and the debaters don’t play to the crowd. The whole thing moves faster and is more substantive. Newsom is debating loose. It’s as if he doesn’t have anything to lose — because he doesn’t. Unlike DeSantis, he isn’t running for anything, and is using the platform just to burnish his reputation. Hannity is being very genial and noncombative! But he is essentially hosting a Republican primary debate that happens to have a Democrat in it. Newsom says DeSantis has been unsuccessfully trying to “out-Trump Trump.” “By the way, how’s that going for you, Ron?” Newsom intoned. DeSantis forced a smile but didn’t speak. “How’s that going for you, Ron?” “You’re down 41 points in your own home state,” Newsom says to DeSantis, as they continue to argue over immigration and fentanyl. Hannity again playing it straight down the neutral middle, asking DeSantis: What are the odds that Biden’s border policies have allowed terrorists into the country. Just a historical reminder that Sean Hannity has “evolved” — his word — on immigration over the years. After the 2012 loss of the White House, he was open to a path to citizenship for immigrants who had arrived illegally. He snapped back to the right by 2016. French Laundry twice!! Newsom admitted to Hannity this year that it was “dumb” to attend that unmasked dinner at the ultra-luxurious French Laundry with lobbyists. For those who may have forgotten that fateful dinner in Yountville, here’s a quick reminder. Again with the French Laundry. This summer, DeSantis sent two planeloads of migrants to California’s capital to protest Democratic policies on border enforcement, then held a fund-raiser in Sacramento at a country club near Newsom’s home. Adam, it’s certainly possible. Voters in Iowa really do tune in late in the race, as you know. Maggie, How do you think Iowa Republicans watching this will react to the DeSantis we are seeing tonight? Adam, I think Republicans will wonder where this guy has been. There’s a weird mismatch of focuses here. DeSantis, who is running for president, is in a governor debate, concentrating on Florida vs. California. Newsom, not running for president, is in a presidential debate, talking national politics and policy. But DeSantis has been more aggressive than in his primary debates, maybe benefiting from a forum where he’s actually comfortable attacking his main opponent. Adam, I guess ... but this is a very friendly format and Newsom is still scoring points against him. Maggie, Newsom’s people kept saying in their advance debate spin that this would be two-on-one. So far they are right, notwithstanding what Hannity said at the top of the debate. I’m guessing Newsom's willingness to do this — and stand up against both of them — will accrue to his benefit with the audience that matters: Democratic donors and party leaders. DeSantis is showing what he would be like as a general-election candidate, right? A tough opponent for Biden. That has not been apparent in Republican primary debates. Adam, what difference does it make if DeSantis damages Newsom? He’s not running for anything here. Isn’t his job to promote Biden and whack at DeSantis in this debate? Reid, I agree his top job here is hitting DeSantis and promoting Biden. But he is also thinking about his own future; a good debate performance tonight helps him if he runs for president in 2028. So far, it seems that DeSantis is doing himself some good; can’t tell yet if he is doing any damage to Newsom. Newsom to DeSantis: “You were a lockdown governor.” He is hitting him from both directions at the same time, while also calling out death rate differences. DeSantis is trying to present himself as a tough guy willing to interrupt and trying to bully Newsom — a throwback to his 2022 persona, but not how he’s appeared in any of the Republican primary debates. It was interesting how Newsom hit DeSantis on Covid — from the right, saying he, too, had initially followed Fauci. Hannity now asking a question about their Covid records as if they hadn’t just been discussing this. “I don’t want to be a hall monitor,” Hannity said. Newsom has knocked DeSantis off his game a bit with the attacks on his Covid record. Hannity repeatedly interrupts, saying he wants the debate to “breathe." Hannity is making no effort to impose order on debate so far; it’s a lot of two governors shouting statistics over each other. Newsom is not just a Biden surrogate but an effective Trump one right now. Florida’s economy has rebounded from the pandemic more quickly, with faster job growth and lower unemployment. But by most measures, even adjusting for differences in age and population, California’s approach saved significantly more lives. California’s Covid policies were among the nation’s strictest, closing many schools and workplaces and mandating vaccines for school and health-care workers. Florida kept schools and workplaces open, and although DeSantis emphasized vaccination early, he later reversed course and signed a bill prohibiting employers from mandating vaccines. DeSantis getting hit by Newsom on a Trump favorite -- that DeSantis actually listened to Dr. Anthony Fauci early in the pandemic. Newsom is doing a better job defending Biden than he is defending California. DeSantis has invoked Newsom’s children twice in the first 20 minutes. Hannity asked Newsom: “Is Joe Biden paying you tonight? I thought this was state versus state.” But Newsom’s camp said from the start he was going to make this about the presidential race. California’s unemployment rate is routinely higher than other states, in large part because the work force is huge. Newsom is promoting Bidenomics by name even as Biden himself has stopped using the phrase and officials on his campaign have come to understand that its $40 million ad campaign has not changed sour opinions about the president’s economic policies. Agree with Adam. That struck me. I haven’t heard Biden sell his economic record with anything like the force and deftness that Newsom just did. Some of Newsom’s riff — boasting about Black and Hispanic unemployment rates — sounded exactly like Trump’s economic sales pitch while in office. Newsom is doing a better job defending Biden’s economic record than Biden has. Adam, Newsom’s pitch for Biden’s economic record doesn’t include the inherent defensiveness the White House often has. Sean Hannity kicked off by saying that while he’s a conservative, he planned to moderate the debate neutrally. But his choice of topics so far definitely leans to the red side of purple. DeSantis will not let Newsom get off his heels. Newsom short-circuits a long Hannity question about tax rates to say that Florida’s taxes are far more regressive (Florida doesn’t have income taxes; California does, and the rates rise with income levels). DeSantis brings up Biden for first time, tying Biden and Kamala Harris to Newsom. To my eye, DeSantis is much more comfortable on this stage than he’s been on any of the presidential debate stages. Yes, Maggie. Because he is comfortable hitting Newsom — and hasn’t thrown these kinds of punches in any Republican debate. The Tax Foundation, a right-leaning think tank, reports that last year, California had the fifth-highest state and local tax burden in the nation, and ranked Florida 39th. But the burden falls mostly on the rich under California’s progressive system, whereas Florida’s system relies on sales and property taxes, which fall more heavily on lower and middle-income taxpayers. The first two questions have been favorable for DeSantis: about people moving out of California and high taxes in California. They’re already talking over each other. “You and President Trump are really trying to light democracy on fire,” Newsom says, saying that what both he and DeSantis have in common is that neither will be their party’s nominee next year. Newsom is so far ignoring Hannity's question about people moving out of California to hit DeSantis. In the first minute, the harsh words from DeSantis about Newsom are a stark reminder of how not-harsh he has been to Trump. Hannity finally getting to a question after a lengthy preamble. Lots of smiles for Newsom and DeSantis at the start. They are playing their parts. Red tie for DeSantis. Blue tie for Newsom. The DeSantis and Newsom camps have set up an awkward post-debate conundrum for reporters who made it to Alpharetta. DeSantis will swing by the Marriott here to give his spin. Newsom will be across the parking lot at the Hilton — at the same time. This is really really weird that six weeks from Iowa we’re watching the guy who’s hanging on to a second-place tie do this debate. Just don’t think that can be stressed enough. Another thing (besides Trump-baiting by Newsom) to look forward to: There are going to be much sharper conflicts on issues than we’ve seen at the Republican debates. No air guitar here. The Newsom political operation has also been using tonight’s debate to tap his online following to raise money for the Biden campaign. As of 7 p.m. Eastern, it had raised more than $325,000, according to a post on X from Tim Tagaris, a Newsom digital adviser. Tonight’s debate pregame may be introducing some non-regular Fox News viewers to Jesse Watters, who replaced the defenestrated Tucker Carlson in the 8 p.m. time slot earlier this year. Tonight’s show has included a canine-in-the-street interview at a dog run. To Jim’s point, Jesse Watters is spending a lot of time in the run-up to this debate flatly stating that Newsom is doing this debate because he will be the Democratic nominee in 2024. The Newsom camp has taken great pains to deny that and say the California governor is here to defend President Biden’s record. Whoever is watching, this exercise will have at least some tangible benefits for one politician. Newsom sent out a blast email to donors today saying he was debating DeSantis “because I want to tell Fox News viewers something they’ve never heard before … The truth about Joe Biden’s record.” Then he asked them to donate $10 to the president’s re-election campaign. It’s notable that Newsom is attending this debate in Georgia on the eve of the annual winter gathering of his fellow Democratic governors in Phoenix. More than a dozen such governors, but not Newsom, are expected to attend. Bigger question: Will Biden be watching? The big question: Will Trump be watching? I’m also expecting lots of numbers from Newsom. He is an inveterate slinger of statistics. He also is prone to the occasional spasm of Silicon Valley consultant-speak, with references to “meeting the moment” and things being “foundational” and “in real time.” One thing I am interested to watch for is how Newsom tries to bait DeSantis into either defending or attacking Trump. DeSantis has generally been cautious about critiquing Trump on policy. Shane, that is something I’m keen to see as well. Newsom knows this is a tricky topic for DeSantis. Per what Jonathan said about Newsom and Hannity having a — dare I say — friendship, Hannity told me that he and Newsom text each other at night: He texted Newsom ribbing him for the Newsom operation’s spin about this being a two-on-one-debate for the California governor. (The two being DeSantis and Hannity.) Hours before the debate, the DeSantis presidential campaign showcased five Floridians who had moved to the Sunshine State from California. It was a preview of a line of attack the Florida governor is likely to use against Gavin Newsom for much of the night. Who is the real audience for each ambitious governor? Gavin Newsom, right, and Sean Hannity, left, are seen from behind during a broadcast. Cameras and camera equipment are in the background, pointed toward them Gov. Gavin Newsom, right, was interviewed by Sean Hannity after the second Republican presidential debate in September. For all the attention devoted to the DeSantis-Newsom debate, it is unclear how many viewers will bother to tune in. Aides to both men are not expecting a big audience (people who want to watch it on the Fox News website will have to provide cable authentication), certainly as compared with the Republican presidential debates. But does that matter? For Mr. Newsom, perhaps not. His real audience is not voters, but party leaders, donors and the online commentators posting about his performance, or reviewing it in the post-debate who-won, who-lost panels. The California governor is not running for office now, but he is widely seen as laying the groundwork for a potential presidential race in 2028. As such, you can expect the Newsom political organization to aggressively circulate favorable post-debate notices to Democratic leaders, donors and consultants, the insider class who will matter when attention begins to shift to the next presidential election.Unlike Mr. Newsom, Mr. DeSantis is facing voters, starting this January in Iowa. But his real audience will be Republican leaders who have had doubts about his strengths as a presidential candidate after these rocky six months. The aim for this one-on-one match is to try to reassure them of his strengths as a general election candidate or, for some of them, as an alternative to Mr. Trump. Newsom is agile on the stump, but one thing to keep in mind about him is that he has not had a lot of experience with tough debates during his years as governor of California and mayor of San Francisco. And California being California, he certainly has not had much experience debating Republicans. Newsom is widely seen as a formidable candidate nationally in 2028, in part because of his agility in forums like tonight’s. How he handles what are likely to be attacks from DeSantis about President Biden and about pockets of homelessness in major California cities will be revealing as to how he’ll fare on a national stage. Newsom is said to far prefer going on Fox over liberal networks like MSNBC. Very few prominent Democrats these days make appearances in the conservative news media — Pete Buttigieg and Bernie Sanders are the only ones that come to mind — so Newsom has this space almost to himself. He can play the loyal soldier defending Biden, but at the same time make the viewing audience imagine him in a general election squaring off against a Republican. It’s not clear who the audience for this will be, even here in California. Still, for his fellow Democrats, Newsom’s zest in his earlier interviews with Hannity was a pleasant surprise. I’m rooting for a full-throated comparison of beaches, or maybe a Disneyland vs. Disney World smackdown. The last time Newsom went on Sean Hannity’s show, Trump was said to be irritated that Newsom was getting so much clear airtime on prime-time Fox News to charmingly deliver Democratic talking points to its audience. Newsom is very slick in these settings — historically a far better TV performer than DeSantis. The debate is taking place during a tenuous moment in Ron DeSantis’s 2024 campaign. Ron DeSantis in Manchester, N.H., in November. Ron DeSantis of Florida is accustomed to crushing Democrats in his home state. He romped to a re-election victory last year over a weak Democratic opponent, as Republicans also picked up supermajorities in the State Legislature. Since he became governor, Republican voter registration numbers have surged statewide, leapfrogging those of Democrats, who traditionally held the edge. But on Thursday Mr. DeSantis will face something new: a brash, confident Democrat, in the form of his California counterpart, Gov. Gavin Newsom, in a debate this evening on Fox News. Mr. Newsom, who has feuded with Mr. DeSantis for years, has recently been sharpening his attacks, preparing for the encounter with appearances on Sean Hannity’s Fox News show. (Mr. Hannity is set to moderate the debate.) For Mr. DeSantis, taking on Mr. Newsom is fraught with risks at a time when his presidential campaign seems to be gasping for air. While Mr. Newsom has little to lose from a poor showing — he is not running for anything, few Democrats are likely to be watching Fox News, and he has plenty of time to live down any missteps — Mr. DeSantis is fighting for his survival as a serious Republican contender. Having boastfully agreed to the matchup with Mr. Newsom, Mr. DeSantis now would seem to need to live up to the expectations that he has set for himself, by landing devastating rhetorical blows on the Californian, or at least by reaping a triumphant exchange or two that he can display to his social-media followers with pride. Should he come away embarrassed, by contrast, it would fuel his rivals’ arguments that he was a better candidate on paper than he has shown himself to be in real life. “Unless DeSantis does great, it will be more of the same narrative that he’s underperforming,” said Mike Murphy, a veteran Republican strategist. Still, Mr. Murphy said, given the state of the race, Mr. DeSantis could use the exposure. “There’s nowhere to go but up,” he said. Although Mr. DeSantis entered the nomination contest as the strongest challenger to former President Donald J. Trump, he is now fighting former Gov. Nikki Haley of South Carolina for second place. His personal mannerisms have been picked apart on the campaign trail and the debate stage. And the well-funded super PAC that was supposed to bolster his campaign has been splintered by infighting, leading to the resignation of the group’s chief executive. Over the last few months, Mr. Trump, the front-runner, has cruelly punctured the aura of invincibility that Mr. DeSantis spent years building in Florida. Mr. Trump has mocked everything from Mr. DeSantis’s name and his height to his deflating poll numbers, giving Mr. Newsom ample ideas for targets to hit. Mr. Trump has also ridiculed the idea of debating Mr. DeSantis and the other Republican candidates, citing his large lead as a reason to skip the G.O.P. primary debates. News media coverage of those debates has centered almost as much on Mr. Trump’s presence elsewhere as on the arguments onstage. Still, getting the better of Mr. Newsom in a one-on-one matchup could help Mr. DeSantis generate the positive headlines his campaign needs. His supporters say they expect Mr. DeSantis to burnish his image as a fighter against a well-known liberal opponent. “This is going to be on Fox News with millions of conservative Republican voters watching it,” said Nick Iarossi, a Florida lobbyist and longtime DeSantis ally. “It gives Governor DeSantis the opportunity to once again show why he’s been such a successful governor and how he’s been able to take on folks on the left.” But Mr. DeSantis, who is banking his campaign on winning the Iowa caucuses in January, is taking time out of his schedule to debate an opponent who is not even running against him. Their nationally televised debate is taking place in Georgia rather than in an early-nominating state like Iowa or New Hampshire. And hanging over the contest, as always, will be the specter of Mr. Trump, the man Mr. DeSantis actually needs to beat. DeSantis’s decision to go ahead with this debate has widely been seen as a distraction at best and a stunt at worst. He is in the middle of fighting for the Republican nomination, but this debate indicates he’s equally focused on 2028, with Trump still leading. This debate is set up for Gavin Newsom to succeed. He gets public credit for appearing on enemy turf — and yet it’s not really enemy turf. He and Sean Hannity clearly like each other, or at least it appears that way when Newsom comes on his show and easily dispatches Hannity’s “tough” questions. The Trump team has been issuing daily statements about DeSantis with the subject line “Kiss of Death,” a reference to a private remark that Jeff Roe, the DeSantis super PAC’s main strategist, made to donors during the summer, telling them they had 60 days left to win the race. The statement before tonight’s debate mocks DeSantis’s footwear as high heels, portrays him as someone with a bobbling head and calls him an “OnlyFans wannabe model.” Yikes. Gavin Newsom wants Fox News viewers to hear him out. A portrait of Gov. Gavin Newsom of California. Gov. Gavin Newsom of California will debate Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida on Thursday night in Alpharetta, Ga. Gavin Newsom has a scant history of tough debates over his two decades as governor and lieutenant governor of California and mayor of San Francisco. But he is nevertheless unusually prepared for his nationally televised face-off on Thursday with Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida: Over the past few months, Mr. Newsom has lived through something of a debate boot camp on how to respond to attacks on California, President Biden, the Democratic Party and his own mistakes over the years. It came in the form of two lively interviews with Sean Hannity, the conservative Fox News host who will moderate the debate on Thursday. From the moment they sat down, he pressed Mr. Newsom on the differences between them on issues as varied as immigration and law enforcement. “I want border security,” Mr. Newsom said, disputing the premise of Mr. Hannity’s question in the opening minutes of their first encounter. “Democrats want border security.” “You don’t want any walls,” Mr. Hannity responded, referring to the wall former President Donald J. Trump set out to build along the Mexican border. Mr. Newsom kept talking. “I want comprehensive immigration reform,” Mr. Newsom said. “I want to actually address the issue more comprehensively — just like Ronald Reagan did.” He added, “I don’t need to be educated on the issue of the border or issues of immigration policy.” If those earlier sessions are any clue, Mr. Newsom will be combative when confronted with questions about people and corporations leaving California. “We are on the way to becoming the world’s fourth-largest economy,” he has told Mr. Hannity. “Eat your heart out, Germany.” Read more about the California governor’s sparring with Sean Hannity. Two things I’ll be watching tonight: How much time does Gavin Newsom spend talking about Gavin Newsom, rather than President Biden? And how much time does Ron DeSantis spend talking about Gavin Newsom, rather than Biden? As a critic, I see tonight’s made-for-TV spectacle less as a “debate” — though I assume one will break out — than as a work of speculative fiction, like “The Plot Against America” or “For All Mankind.” It’s a glimpse at an America that went down a different timeline. Maybe in this timeline, former President Donald J. Trump graciously conceded the 2020 election to retire into a private life of contemplation; maybe President Biden decided to pass the torch to a new generation after one term. It’s part fantasy-politics what-iffery. Members of both parties have been imagining break-glass-in-case-of-emergency scenarios in case Trump were legally waylaid or Biden stepped aside. But it’s also an attempt to fill a media vacuum, in an election where the most likely nominees are the same as four years ago — TV abhors a rerun — and aren’t currently debating anyone. Quite possibly tonight ends up an asterisk that only the most committed election junkies remember. But every once in a while real life does imitate fiction. What to watch for during the debate. A profile view of Ron DeSantis on a TV set. Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida listening to Sean Hannity, the Fox News host, during an interview after the second Republican debate. The two governors, Ron DeSantis of Florida and Gavin Newsom of California, have clashed repeatedly as they seek national attention. Here’s what to watch for tonight: The higher stakes for DeSantis Mr. DeSantis has much more riding on this moment than his verbal sparring partner. The first three Republican presidential debates featured jam-packed stages, some verbal brawling, often involving the 38-year-old entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy, and not a lot of Mr. DeSantis. Thursday night will be one-on-one, and with a friendly moderator, Sean Hannity, for the Republican on the stage. Mr. DeSantis’s poll numbers have sagged, leading him to seek exposure at every opportunity, including the debate against Mr. Newsom. Now Mr. DeSantis, who once preferred to ensconce himself in the friendly bubble of conservative media, has become almost a regular on mainstream broadcast networks. He has also repeatedly challenged his main rivals for the Republican nomination to debate him, hoping to generate momentum and attention, although his performances onstage so far have done little to change the dynamics of the race. But Mr. Trump has refused to appear at the G.O.P. debates, saying they were not worth his time given his lead in the polls. And former Gov. Nikki Haley of South Carolina, who has caught up with or overtaken Mr. DeSantis in many early-state polls and has been busy building support among influential Republican donors, declined his recent offer of a one-on-one matchup. Voters in Iowa go to the caucuses Jan. 15 to cast the first ballots of the primary season. Mr. DeSantis has nailed down the coveted endorsements of the state’s governor, Kim Reynolds, and an influential evangelical leader, Bob Vander Plaats. Now he has to win over more Republican voters if he hopes to catch Mr. Trump and buoy his campaign ahead of more difficult primaries in New Hampshire and South Carolina. There will not be a partisan audience to influence viewer perceptions, but Mr. Newsom’s camp fully expects Mr. Hannity to unlevel the playing field: “We’re under no illusions; this is going to be a two-on-one match with the ref in the bag for the home team,” said Nathan Click, a Newsom spokesman. If the moderator keeps the Democrat on the defensive over policy, Mr. DeSantis could use the 90 minutes on Fox to combat his awkward, remote and sometimes canned image. DeSantis supporters say it’s a moment for him to highlight the stakes for the Republican Party in a debate not over marginal policy differences between Republicans, like the primary debates, but over starkly different visions of the future. If he can best Mr. Newsom, he can bask in the victory of a unified party, if only for one night. “Ron DeSantis will take this responsibility seriously and looks forward to sharing the stark contrast between his vision to revive our nation and Newsom’s blueprint for failure,” said Mr. DeSantis’s campaign manager, James Uthmeier. Gov. Gavin Newsom getting ready for an interview after the second Republican Primary Debate, in Simi Valley, Calif., in September. A top Biden surrogate seizing the spotlight In political circles, it goes without saying that California’s governor has his eyes on the highest office in the land. “It’s very obvious that he is running for president right now,” said Jessica Patterson, the chairwoman of the California Republican Party. “He elevates himself to a national level when he tries to punch up to Ron DeSantis. Every opportunity he gets to be on the national stage, he goes for it.” Maybe so, but as long as Mr. Biden is seeking re-election, Mr. Newsom’s job on that stage is to defend the president’s record. Nothing else would lift Mr. Newsom in the eyes of his own party more than his help keeping a Democrat in the White House next year — and Mr. Trump out. But to be a credible surrogate, Mr. Newsom cannot come off as an elite, West Coast liberal out of touch with the concerns of voters in key swing states far from California, like Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin and Georgia. Can Hannity keep the focus on policy? Mr. Hannity sees the showdown not as a stand-in for a presidential debate but as a chance for the governors of the first and third largest states in the nation to defend and showcase the very different policies governing those states. “I think both governors really have an opportunity to present their political philosophy and ideology, why they govern the way they do,” he said in an interview. They would have much to discuss: Florida’s low-tax, growing economy versus California’s dominance in fields like technology and electric vehicles but struggles against Republican states poaching its businesses; university systems with divergent approaches to political speech and influence; California’s hands-on approach to climate change, including an eventual ban on internal combustion engines, versus Florida’s laissez-faire attitude even as it is battered by stronger, more frequent hurricanes and coastal flooding. Mr. DeSantis has relished talking up his record in Florida. He often brags about how many California residents are moving to Florida, claiming that Mr. Newsom’s “leftist” policies are responsible. Mr. DeSantis once said that Mr. Newsom had treated Californians like “peasants” during the coronavirus pandemic. He filmed a campaign ad in San Francisco that painted the city as a kind of dystopia, with Mr. DeSantis saying he had seen people using drugs and “defecating on the street.” Mr. Newsom has also not held back. During Mr. DeSantis’s re-election campaign, he ran a pointed ad on Florida airwaves criticizing Mr. DeSantis’s policies and recently ran another attacking the six-week abortion ban signed by the Florida governor. He has called Mr. DeSantis “weak” and “undisciplined” and said he would get “crushed” by Mr. Trump in the G.O.P. primary. After Mr. DeSantis sent planeloads of migrants from the southern border to Sacramento this year, Mr. Newsom suggested his Florida counterpart could face kidnapping charges, calling him a “small, pathetic man.” Mr. Newsom still sees the evening as “a way to showcase and put more scrutiny on Mr. DeSantis’s brand of authoritarianism,” Mr. Click said. But both men have said their more pressing objective for this debate is the White House, not the state house. “We’re focused on defending the president and contrasting the president’s record with Ron DeSantis’s record of taking away fundamental freedoms that we have come to take for granted over the last 50 years,” Mr. Click said, tallying off abortion, free speech and the right to vote. The Newsom camp has made much of the California governor’s willingness to venture into hostile territory and bring his message to Republican voters. And just a decade ago, the northern reaches of Fulton County, Ga., where the debate is being held, qualified as such. Not anymore. Most of North Fulton has turned Democratic in the last eight years, as its citizenry has diversified and many suburban Republicans have recoiled at the party’s direction under the leadership of Mr. Trump. Mr. Trump eked out a win in the ZIP code where the debate will be held, though his margin slipped by nearly 5 percentage points. But all around that 30005 ZIP code are blue stretches, a testament to Georgia’s arrival on the national stage as a true presidential battlefield. Both camps said they wanted the debate in Georgia (Mr. DeSantis will be campaigning on Friday in South Carolina next door). Fox News chose the venue, a battleground within a battleground.







Article: 4
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Talk About Abortion, Don’t Talk About Trump: Governors Give Biden Advice
Author: Reid J. Epstein
Publication_Date: Dec. 4, 2023
Article_Content: At an annual gathering in Arizona, Democratic governors offered a series of explanations for the president’s political struggles and suggested ideas for selling voters on his re-election. From left, Gavin Newsom, Laura Kelly and Gretchen Whitmer are all Democratic governors and allies of President Biden who weighed in on how he could best approach the coming election year. America’s Democratic governors brag about booming local economies, preside over ribbon-cuttings of projects paid for with new federal legislation and have successfully framed themselves as defenders of abortion rights and democracy. Almost all of them are far more popular in their home states than the Democratic president they hope to re-elect next year. While President Biden is mired in the political doldrums of low approval ratings and a national economy that voters are sour on, Democratic governors are riding high, having won re-election in red-state Kentucky last month and holding office in five of the seven most important presidential battleground states. The governors, like nearly all prominent Democrats, are publicly projecting confidence: In interviews and conversations with eight governors at their annual winter gathering at the Arizona Biltmore in Phoenix over the weekend, they expressed on-the-record optimism that Mr. Biden would win re-election. But also like many Democrats, some privately acknowledged fears that former President Donald J. Trump could win a rematch with Mr. Biden. They also said that Mr. Biden, at 81 years old, might not compare well with a younger Republican like Nikki Haley, the former United Nations ambassador, Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida or even former Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey. The governors offered a series of explanations for Mr. Biden’s political struggles and supplied free advice. Here are six ways they believe he can raise his standing ahead of next year’s election. Talk more about abortion. Mr. Biden barely says the word abortion in his public statements, a fact that frustrates fellow governors hoping he can, as many of them have, use anger over the Supreme Court’s 2022 decision overturning Roe v. Wade to improve his political fortunes. “We should talk about all the threats to women’s health care, including abortion, and use that word specifically,” said Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan. “We should be talking about it like that because Americans are awake. They are angry that this right could be stripped away and we are the only ones fighting for it.” On abortion politics, Gov. Phil Murphy of New Jersey acknowledged that “it’s widely known that this is probably an uncomfortable reality for him,” given that Mr. Biden, a practicing Catholic, once voted in the Senate to let states overturn Roe v. Wade and his stance on abortion rights has evolved over the years. Mr. Murphy said Mr. Biden must be forthright about discussing the likelihood that Republicans would aim to enact new abortion restrictions if they win control of the federal government in 2024 and emphasizing the Democratic position that decisions about abortion should be left to women and their doctors. “That has to be laid out in a much more crystal-clear, explicit, affirmative way,” he said. Stop talking about Trump. The governors broadly agreed that Mr. Trump would be the Republican nominee. They don’t love Mr. Biden’s recent turn to focus more attention on his predecessor. “You’ve got to run for something and not against someone,” said Gov. Andy Beshear of Kentucky. That is easy for Mr. Beshear to say — he is among the nation’s most popular governors and just won re-election in a deep-red state. Gov. Laura Kelly of Kansas urged the president to stop talking about Mr. Trump altogether. Be positive, she said, and let others carry the fight to Mr. Trump. “If I were in Biden’s shoes, I would not talk about Trump,” she said. “I would let other people talk about Trump.” Appeal to moderate Republicans and independents. Gov. Tim Walz of Minnesota also said Mr. Biden needed to adopt some of Mr. Trump’s penchant for bragging. “He’s been modest for so long, to watch him do it now feels a little uncomfortable,” Mr. Walz said. Gov. Roy Cooper of North Carolina said his constituents were hoping Republicans would nominate someone other than Mr. Trump. Mr. Murphy said hopefully that Republicans supporting someone else in their primary might stay home or wind up voting for Mr. Biden next year. “What if Trump is the nominee? What’s the behavior pattern among the Haley, DeSantis and Chris Christie supporters? Where do they go?” Mr. Murphy said. “I find it hard to believe that a majority of them are going to Trump.” Tell people what Biden’s done.Gov. Gavin Newsom of California, fresh off a prime-time Fox News debate against Mr. DeSantis that seemed meant in part to elevate the ambitious Mr. Newsom to the role of Mr. Biden’s leading defender, lamented “the gap between performance and perception.” He was one of several governors who said their constituents felt good about their lives but were pessimistic about the state of the country. “People feel pretty good about their states, feel pretty good about their communities, even their own lived lives,” Mr. Newsom said. “You ask, ‘How are you doing?’ They say, ‘We’re doing great, but this country’s going to hell.’” Mr. Newsom said Mr. Biden’s biggest problem was that he had not been able to communicate to voters that he is responsible for improvements in their lives. “People just don’t know the record,” he said. “They don’t hear it. They never see it.” In North Carolina, which last week became the 40th state to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Cooper said people who are newly eligible for health care were not likely to credit Mr. Biden or White House policies. “The people who are getting it don’t really associate it with anybody other than finally being able to get health care for themselves,” he said. Focus more attention on legislative achievements. The governors all seemed to agree that they would like to see Mr. Biden spend more time cutting ribbons and attending groundbreakings for new projects paid for by infrastructure, climate and semiconductor funding he signed into law. “I would be doing those morning, noon and night,” Mr. Murphy said. Ms. Kelly of Kansas, who won her red state twice, said Mr. Biden should announce the opening of new projects and factories because she said it would focus attention away from his age. “I would spend a lot of time doing those just because they’re relatively easy and they are energizing,” she said. And Mr. Walz, whom his fellow governors voted the new chairman of the Democratic Governors Association, said Mr. Biden’s challenge would be explaining to people the future benefits of investments being made now. “The problem is going to be, it’s going to take us 20 years to build all this infrastructure out,” Mr. Walz said. “Whether they see it within the next 11 months or not, that’s what we need to tell the story.” Find some Democrats with enthusiasm. No governor at the Phoenix gathering expressed more desire to give Mr. Biden another term in the White House than Mr. Newsom, who used a 40-minute chat with reporters to take a victory lap from his debate with Mr. DeSantis, a ratings bonanza for the Fox News host Sean Hannity that doubled as the largest audience of the California governor’s political career. Mr. Newsom, who since the middle of last year has evolved from a friendly critic of Mr. Biden’s political messaging to one of his most enthusiastic supporters, said his fellow governors needed to perform like old-school politicians who could deliver a constituency for an ally through force of will by activating supporters to follow political commands. “We, the Democratic Party, need to get out there on behalf of the leader of the Democratic Party, Joe Biden, and make the case and do it with pride,” Mr. Newsom said. “We’ve got to wind this thing up.” The task may be difficult. Mr. Cooper described “a general malaise and frustration” that has Americans blaming Mr. Biden for forces often beyond his control. But Mr. Newsom said that if others were wary of carrying the torch for Mr. Biden in the next year, he was not afraid to do so all by himself. “If no one’s showing up doing stuff, I’m going to show up,” he said. “I can’t take it. I can’t take the alternative. I can’t even conceive it.”





Article: 5
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Tuberville Drops Blockade of Most Military Promotions
Author: Catie Edmondson
Publication_Date: Dec. 5, 2023
Article_Content: Under pressure from senators in both parties, the Alabama Republican allowed more than 400 promotions to move forward, saying he would continue to block only the most senior positions. Senator Tommy Tuberville said he had lifted his holds on about 440 military promotions. Senator Tommy Tuberville, Republican of Alabama, on Tuesday lifted his blockade of nearly all the military promotions he had delayed for almost a year in protest of a Pentagon policy ensuring abortion access for service members, saying he would continue to hold up only the most senior generals. Hours after Mr. Tuberville said he would allow the promotions of about 440 service members, the Senate confirmed all of them in one fell swoop, by a single voice vote. “Thank God,” Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, said after he pushed the promotions through. “These military officers will now get the promotions they so rightfully earned.” The retreat represented a stark reversal for Mr. Tuberville, who for 10 months had steadfastly defended his move to stall all senior military promotions over a new Pentagon policy that offers time off and travel reimbursement to service members seeking abortions or fertility care. With his blockade, the first-term senator had single-handedly disrupted the Pentagon’s ability to fill its top ranks, leaving hundreds of promotions in limbo. Other officials in senior positions were left to operate on an “acting” basis, unable to hire people to staff their new positions or to move into the quarters that come with the job. “In the end, this was all pointless,” President Biden said in a statement. “Senator Tuberville, and the Republicans who stood with him, needlessly hurt hundreds of service members and military families and threatened our national security — all to push a partisan agenda. I hope no one forgets what he did.” The reversal came amid mounting pressure on Mr. Tuberville from both Republicans and Democrats on Capitol Hill. Mr. Tuberville said on Tuesday that he had decided to lift the blockade after senators hatched a plan to temporarily go around the chamber’s rules to allow confirmation of almost all military nominees as a bloc. That would have been a major break with tradition and a step many senators in both parties were reluctant to take. “It’s been a long fight,” Mr. Tuberville told reporters. “We fought hard. We did the right thing for the unborn and for our military, fighting back against executive overreach.” Mr. Tuberville said he would abandon his holds on “everybody but the 10 or 11 four-stars,” referring to four-star generals. “Those will continue.” Mr. Tuberville’s decision was met with relief by both Republicans and Democrats who had been confounded by his strategy. Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said Mr. Tuberville’s decision was “long overdue.” The blockade “has caused extreme difficulties for the military, but they will cope with it,” Mr. Reed said. “Our mission now is to get all of those officers confirmed — and never, ever revert back to such behavior.” “Military officers are not political tokens,” he continued. “They can’t be moved around the playing board to get something else you want.” At the Pentagon, officials welcomed the news but urged Mr. Tuberville to drop his holds on senior military promotions as well. “As evidenced by everything that’s going on in the world right now, we have a very important mission in terms of defending this nation, and anytime you add a level of uncertainty into the chain of command, it creates an unnecessary friction,” said Brig. Gen. Patrick S. Ryder, the Pentagon press secretary. “We’ll continue to stay engaged with Senator Tuberville in the Senate directly to urge that all the holds on all our general flag officer nominations be lifted,” he added. Mr. Tuberville’s hold meant that to promote military officials, the Senate was forced to go through individual nominations one by one, holding a series of votes on each to circumvent his objections. Mr. Schumer did so for a handful of senior officials, including the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. But both Democrats and Republicans agreed that continuing to consider hundreds of promotions individually was a time-consuming process that was untenable. The policy Mr. Tuberville was targeting, announced in February, allows service members to take leave and be reimbursed for transportation expenses if they must travel to obtain an abortion or certain fertility treatments because such procedures are not available where they are based. The policy was created after the Supreme Court struck down Roe v. Wade, leaving the nation with a patchwork of state abortion laws. It is intended to provide equal access to health care to military personnel who cannot choose where they are based.





Article: 6
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Justice O’Connor’s Judicial Legacy Was Undermined by Court’s Rightward Shift
Author: Adam Liptak
Publication_Date: Dec. 1, 2023
Article_Content: Since her retirement in 2006, the court has dismantled her key rulings on abortion, affirmative action and campaign finance. Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, third from the right, held the crucial vote in many of the court’s most highly charged cases, and her vision shaped American life for her quarter century on the court. Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, who died Friday at 93, was the sort of figure once familiar in American political and judicial life: a moderate Republican ready to look for compromise and common ground. That led her to vote to uphold abortion rights, affirmative action and campaign finance regulations. Since she retired in 2006, replaced by the far more conservative Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr., the Supreme Court has dismantled large parts of her legacy. That is nowhere more apparent than in abortion rights. Justice O’Connor joined the controlling opinion in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, the 1992 decision that, to the surprise of many, reaffirmed the core of the constitutional right to abortion established in 1973 in Roe v. Wade. To overrule Roe “under fire in the absence of the most compelling reason to re-examine a watershed decision,” she wrote in a joint opinion with Justices Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter, “would subvert the court’s legitimacy beyond any serious question.” Last year, the court did overrule Roe, casting aside Justice O’Connor’s concern for precedent and the court’s public standing. In his majority opinion in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, Justice Alito wrote that Roe and Casey had “enflamed debate and deepened division.” Justice O’Connor also wrote the majority opinion in Grutter v. Bollinger, a 2003 decision upholding race-conscious admissions decisions at public universities, suggesting that they would not longer be needed in a quarter-century. In striking down affirmative action programs in higher education in June, the Supreme Court beat her deadline by five years. Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., writing for the majority, said the timetable was unrealistic and unprincipled. “The 25-year mark articulated in Grutter, however, reflected only that court’s view that race-based preferences would, by 2028, be unnecessary to ensure a requisite level of racial diversity on college campuses,” he wrote. “That expectation was oversold.” Justice O’Connor was also an author of a key campaign finance opinion, McConnell v. Federal Election Commission in 2003. A few years after Justice Alito replaced her, the Supreme Court, by a 5-to-4 vote in 2010, overruled a central portion of that decision in the Citizens United case. A few days later, at a law school conference, Justice O’Connor reflected on the development. “Gosh,” she said, “I step away for a couple of years and there’s no telling what’s going to happen.” President Ronald Reagan nominated Justice O’Connor in 1981, making good on his campaign trail promise to name the first female Supreme Court justice. At the time she was a judge on a state appeals court, not a typical launchpad to the Supreme Court in the modern era, when it has been dominated by former federal appeals court judges. But her origin story was a reflection of her strengths, drawing on a range of experience largely missing among the current justices. Raised and educated in the West, she served in all three branches of Arizona’s government, including as a government lawyer, majority leader of the State Senate, and a trial judge. Her background informed her decisions, which were sensitive to states’ rights and often deferred to the judgments of the other branches of the federal government. Her rulings could be pragmatic and narrow, and her critics said she engaged in split-the-difference jurisprudence. But some of her commitments were unyielding, said Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the second woman to serve on the Supreme Court. “As often as Justice O’Connor and I have disagreed, because she is truly a Republican from Arizona, we were together in all the gender discrimination cases,” Justice Ginsburg, who died in 2020, told USA Today in 2009. What is beyond question is that she was exceptionally powerful. She held the crucial vote in many of the court’s most polarizing cases, and her vision shaped American life for her quarter century on the court. Political scientists stood in awe at the power she wielded. “On virtually all conceptual and empirical definitions, O’Connor is the court’s center — the median, the key, the critical and the swing justice,” Andrew D. Martin, Kevin M. Quinn and Lee Epstein and two colleagues wrote in a study published in 2005 in The North Carolina Law Review shortly before Justice O’Connor’s retirement. In 2018, in a letter announcing her retreat from public life as she battled dementia, Justice O’Connor called for a renewed commitment to nonpartisan values, one that would require “putting country and the common good above party and self-interest, and holding our key governmental institutions accountable.” At the time, Chief Justice Roberts, who had joined the court just months before Justice O’Connor left it, described her place in history. “She broke down barriers for women in the legal profession to the betterment of that profession and the country as a whole,” he wrote. “She serves as a role model not only for girls and women, but for all those committed to equal justice under law.” On Friday, the chief justice added: “We at the Supreme Court mourn the loss of a beloved colleague, a fiercely independent defender of the rule of law, and an eloquent advocate for civics education. And we celebrate her enduring legacy as a true public servant and patriot.” That legacy is striking and real. But in the less than two decades since Justice O’Connor’s retirement, a central aspect of that legacy — her jurisprudence — has proved vulnerable. A correction was made on Dec. 1, 2023: An earlier version of this article misstated the timing of a statement by Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. on Justice Sandra Day O’Connor’s death. The statement was issued Friday, not Monday.






Article: 7
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Ohio Vote Continues a Winning Streak for Abortion Rights
Author:  Kate Zernike
Publication_Date: Nov. 7, 2023
Article_Content: The State Constitution will protect access to the procedure. The ballot result sends a strong signal that voters are still angry about the demise of Roe. Supporters of Issue 1, a ballot measure to protect abortion access, gathered to talk to potential voters in Shaker Heights, Ohio, in October. Ohio’s resounding approval of a ballot measure enshrining a right to abortion in the State Constitution continued a winning streak for abortion-rights groups that have appealed directly to voters after the demise of Roe v. Wade.  Abortion rights advocates who 18 months ago saw few paths around a conservative Supreme Court and gerrymandered legislatures, have instead found success by tapping into popular support. Where Trump Counties in Ohio Voted to Support Abortion Rights Ohio’s referendum drew support from both liberal and conservative areas of the state, and polled well ahead of President Biden’s results three years ago. Issue 1, as the ballot measure is known, had become the country’s most-watched race in the off-year elections, as both parties try to gauge whether voter anger over the loss of the federal right to abortion could help Democrats in next year’s presidential and congressional races. National groups on both sides of the debate poured money into Ohio in recent weeks, delivering a frenzy of ads and canvassers, arguments and misinformation. While abortion-rights groups prevailed in six out of six state ballot measures last year, Ohio was considered the toughest fight yet. And the victory lifted the hopes of abortion-rights groups pushing similar measures next year in red and purple states, including Arizona, South Dakota, Missouri and Florida. “Seven times abortion has been put on the ballot across the country, and seven times voters have turned out overwhelmingly to defend it,” said Mini Timmaraju, president of Reproductive Freedom for All, formerly Naral.  “Once again, voters sent a clear message to Republicans and anti-abortion extremists: We believe in the right to abortion, and we are the majority.” Democrats facing tough odds next year quickly hailed the victory, suggesting how much their hopes are riding on popular support for reproductive rights. President Biden, who polls show remains largely unpopular in Ohio, issued a statement soon after the vote was called, declaring that voters across the country had “rejected attempts by MAGA Republican elected officials to impose extreme abortion bans” that are “out-of-step with the vast majority of Americans.” Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio, one of the Democrats’ most endangered incumbents in 2024, similarly warned that Republicans would “overrule Ohioans by voting for a national abortion ban” if they took control of the Senate. Anti-abortion groups who had triumphed with the overturning of Roe 18 months ago now cast themselves as the underdog. 2023 Elections: Key Races Abortion access in Ohio. Ohio’s resounding approval of a ballot measure enshrining a right to abortion in the State Constitution continued a winning streak for abortion-rights groups that have appealed directly to voters after the demise of Roe v. Wade. Issue 1, as the ballot measure is known, had become the country’s most-watched race in the off-year elections. Governor of Kentucky. Gov. Andy Beshear won a second term, earning a noteworthy victory for a Democrat in a deeply conservative state and one that validated his pragmatic approach over a first term buffeted by a series of natural disasters. Beshear defeated Daniel Cameron, the state’s attorney general, who has been considered a rising star in Republican politics. Virginia legislature. Democrats retook full control of the Virginia General Assembly, handing a defeat to Gov. Glenn Youngkin, a Republican who had poured millions of dollars and his personal political capital into expanding power for his party in the legislature. The legislative races had drawn national attention as a barometer of Youngkin’s star power. Governor of Mississippi. Gov. Tate Reeves, a Republican, overcame concerns about a shortage of excitement among conservatives to secure a second term, fending off a challenge from Brandon Presley, a conservative Democrat. While the outcome was no surprise, given the G.O.P.’s dominance in the state, it did not come quite as easily as some might have expected. “The same pro-life movement that worked almost 50 years to undo the wrongs of Roe v. Wade will not be discouraged,” said Kristan Hawkins, president of Students for Life Action, calling the fight “a marathon, not a sprint.” “Win or lose, our work continues,” she said. Polls had consistently showed that nearly 6 in 10 voters supported the Ohio ballot measure. But anti-abortion groups had powerful allies among the Republicans who control the state government. From the governor and attorney general on down, they had leaned on the power of their offices to try to thwart the measure. They called a special election in August to try to make ballot amendments harder to pass, and purged voter rolls in recent weeks. They rewrote the language that appeared on the ballot, adopting the terms of anti-abortion groups to play to voter unease that the measure would lead to more abortions late in pregnancy. A coalition of abortion rights groups supporting the amendment had appealed to Ohioans’ — and Americans’ — suspicion of government interference. They urged voters to keep politicians out of decisions about their health and families. That argument seemed to resonate with many “yes” voters, across party lines. Exit polls showed women in particular remain angry about the Supreme Court’s decision in Roe. “It’s not up to the government to decide what we do with our bodies,” said Alissa Carver, 26, who lives outside Cincinnati and describes herself as an independent voter. “It’s for us to decide, it’s our experience.” Wendy Pace, a 52-year-old independent, said she didn’t normally vote in off-year elections, but came out because she wanted to vote “yes” on Issue 1. “I have a teenage daughter and I don’t like having my rights taken away from me,” she said. “I fear that this is just the beginning of rights being taken away, and I do fear for my daughter and what her rights would be going forward.” In Shaker Heights, Maxine Williams, 82 and a Democrat, said she was “old enough to remember when women had to go underground and do these back alley abortions.” “Aren’t the Republicans against government interference? Yet they’re doing that,” she said. “It boggles my mind they’re acting this way.” Lauren Beene, a pediatrician and the executive director of Ohio Physicians for Reproductive Rights, said the victory was a credit to “giving the people the opportunity to use their voice.” “Ohio has such a gerrymandered government that it’s disrupted the ability of Ohioans to voice their real opinions,” she said. “When you put democracy in the hands of the people and look to see what the majority opinion is, this is what happens.” The measure had been initiated largely by doctors, and it was helped by public outrage over the consequences of an abortion ban that the legislature passed in 2019. That ban, which prohibited abortion after roughly six weeks of pregnancy with almost no exceptions, was on hold pending a ruling from the State Supreme Court, but was in effect for 82 days after Roe’s reversal. In that time, the state drew national headlines when a 10-year-old rape victim had to travel to Indiana for an abortion because Ohio doctors said they could not provide one. “I think mothers’ lives are important. I think babies’ lives are important. But if a little girl is raped at 10 years old, I don’t think she should have to carry the baby if she is pregnant,” said Delena Reed, 65, a registered Republican who considers herself “pro-life” for religious reasons, yet voted yes on Issue 1. The results of Issue 1 will almost certainly require the court to invalidate the six-week ban. Just as national polls showed that Democrats were more likely to turn out and vote on abortion in last year’s midterms, exit polls in Ohio on Tuesday suggested that Democrats had turned out in greater numbers than Republicans. Returns showed more support for the amendment in metro areas including Cleveland and Columbus, with rural areas more likely to vote against the measure. But even in Mahoning County in northeastern Ohio, considered Trump country, the “yes” vote won. The yes vote won with Republican support, and despite confusion among many voters about what a yes vote would mean —  as well as the fact that voters have historically been more inclined to vote “no” on changing the Constitution. The measure amends the State Constitution to say that individuals have the right to make their own reproductive decisions, including on abortion. The state may prohibit abortion when the fetus is viable outside the uterus — around 23 weeks — except when a pregnant woman’s doctor determines it is necessary to protect her health or life. Abortion opponents argued that it was too extreme for Ohio, and would eliminate parental notification laws on abortion and allow children to get gender-transition care without input from their parents. Constitutional scholars said the amendment would do neither. Greg Eubanks, a 58-year-old voter who described himself as “conservative, but pro-choice,” said he could have gone either way on the measure, but “those things concern me.” “Issue 1 is so far that I voted no against it,” he said, “but I am going to lobby our Republican leadership to soften the language of the current abortion restrictions, which are ridiculous.” The success of Issue 1 shows how much the debate and dynamic around abortion have changed since the Supreme Court overturned Roe last year. Immediately after the decision in June 2022, abortion rights groups seemed to have little way forward, and focused mostly on filing lawsuits to try to stop abortion bans that took effect in more than a dozen states. Abortion opponents, on the wings of their victory at the court, pushed ballot measures saying there was no right to abortion in state constitutions in Kentucky and Kansas. But after those measures failed, and ballot measures to establish abortion rights succeeded, anti-abortion groups have been on the defensive. In Ohio, they were far outspent by abortion rights groups. “Issue 1 passed because abortion activists and outside Democrat donors ran a campaign of fear to Ohio voters: Vote for this ballot measure or women will die,” said Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of SBA Pro-Life America. And Mari Urbina, the managing director of the Indivisible Project, the left-leaning group started in opposition to the election of President Donald J. Trump in 2016, said: “We’re taking notes from this win in Ohio. Now we look ahead to Arizona and so many other battlegrounds where voters will be the firewall for our democracy.” Still, the power of ballot measures to restore abortion rights and to help Democrats may be limited. Roughly 10 states allow citizen-sponsored ballot measures and also restrict abortion. And support for abortion-rights measures in other states has not always translated into support for Democratic candidates. Abortion opponents are looking to block future ballot initiatives. In states like Missouri and Arizona, they have begun “decline to sign” campaigns, hoping to persuade voters not to sign the petitions required to put the measures on the ballot.






Article: 8
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Florida Republicans Propose 6-Week Abortion Ban
Author: David W. Chen and Patricia Mazzei
Publication_Date: March 7, 2023
Article_Content: The bills would tighten the current 15-week limit and offer narrow exceptions. Gov. Ron DeSantis said he welcomed “pro-life legislation.” Florida Republicans introduced parallel bills on Tuesday in the House and Senate that would further restrict the state’s abortion ban to six from 15 weeks of pregnancy. If a ban passes and is signed into law by Gov. Ron DeSantis, Florida would prohibit abortion before many women even realize they are pregnant. Filed on the first day of the 2023 legislative session, the bills had been telegraphed for weeks, as Republican leaders who control Tallahassee sought to build on the anti-abortion momentum generated by the U.S. Supreme Court’s overturning of Roe v. Wade last summer. Mr. DeSantis, a Republican who is widely expected to run for president, said on Tuesday that he supported additional restrictions, though the bills also offer a reminder of the political complexities that he must navigate. Abortion restrictions appeal to Republicans, but 64 percent of Florida residents believe abortion should be legal in most or all cases, according to a recent poll by the Public Religion Research Institute. Legal abortion is also supported by the wider American public, whom Mr. DeSantis would have to face in a general election.  Mr. DeSantis signed a law last year banning abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy, down from 24 weeks, without exceptions for rape or incest. That law was not as strict as what many conservatives have demanded. At least 13 states have bans that prohibit most abortions. Abortion rights supporters are suing the state over the 15-week ban, though it remains in effect while the court case proceeds. One of the first questions Mr. DeSantis fielded at a news conference on Tuesday, after his annual state of the state address, focused on the new abortion bills, which were filed shortly before his speech. The bills allow for exceptions to the proposed bans in cases of rape or incest until 15 weeks of pregnancy, or if the mother’s life is in danger. “I think those exceptions are sensible,” Mr. DeSantis said. “We welcome pro-life legislation.” Kathleen Passidomo, a Naples Republican and the Senate president, said she supported the six-week ban. She had previously signaled that a 12-week ban might be more palatable to lawmakers. “My No. 1 priority was the inclusion, in whatever legislation we carry, was an exception for rape and incest,” she told reporters in the State Capitol on Tuesday. Paul Renner, a Palm Coast Republican and the House speaker, noted that the bill included “trigger language,” meaning that it would not take effect until after the Florida Supreme Court rules on the 15-week abortion ban that legislators passed last year. Among other provisions, the new bills would ban telemedicine for abortion and require that medication abortion be dispensed in person by a doctor. Doctors who break the law would be punishable by up to five years in prison. Democrats were quick to criticize both the contents of the legislation and the messengers. Karine Jean-Pierre, the White House press secretary, told The Miami Herald: “Politicians like Governor DeSantis espouse ‘freedom for all,’ while directly attacking the freedom to make one’s own health care decisions.” In an email, Representative Fentrice Driskell, a Tampa Democrat and the House minority leader, said the bills would essentially make “all abortions impossible” and adversely affect “people from Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and other states in the South who otherwise would have looked to Florida for abortion access.” She added: “Politicians should never be involved in the medical decisions between a person and their doctor.”






Article: 9
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Ohio Is Voting on Whether to Establish Abortion Rights
Author: Kate Zernike
Publication_Date: Nov. 7, 2023
Article_Content: The outcome is being closely watched by Democrats and Republicans looking to measure the strength of voter anger over the loss of federal abortion protections. The outcome of Ohio’s abortion ballot is being watched closely by Democrats and Republicans looking to measure the continuing strength of the anger among voters over the loss of Roe v. Wade. Ohio voters are deciding on a ballot measure that would amend the state’s Constitution to explicitly guarantee the right to abortion. The outcome is being watched closely by Democrats and Republicans looking to measure the continuing strength of the anger among voters at the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, which last year drove many new voters toward the Democrats. Abortion-rights supporters have been on a winning streak with ballot measures since the court’s decision, winning six out of six last year, including in conservative states such as Kentucky and Kansas. They are looking to put similar measures before voters in at least four other red and purple states next year. But Ohio has been their toughest fight. It is the first red state where voters are being asked to affirmatively establish a right to abortion in the state constitution, rather than reject a right established by courts. Historically, voters in Ohio have been inclined to vote against efforts to change the Constitution by ballot measure. Republicans who control state government have leaned on the power of their offices to encourage a “no” vote. They called a special election in August to try to pass their own constitutional amendment that would have made future amendments harder to pass by requiring a supermajority instead of a simple majority. That measure failed, but as early voting began in October, the Republican secretary of state, Frank LaRose, without notice began purging registration rolls of people who had not cast ballots in recent years. Supporters of abortion rights gather at the Van Aken Market Hall to talk about the ballot measure in Shaker Heights, Ohio last month. Maddie Crytzer of Students for Life, which opposes abortion, talks to students about voting “No” on Issue 1 at Otterbein University in Westerville, Ohio last month. A “yes” vote would amend the Ohio Constitution to establish the “right to make and carry out one’s own reproductive decisions,” including on abortion. The state could prohibit abortion after viability, or around 23 weeks, the standard under Roe, except in cases where the patient’s doctor determines it is necessary to protect her life or health. But that amendment does not appear on the ballot. Instead voters see a summary approved by Mr. LaRose saying the amendment “would always allow an unborn child to be aborted at any stage of pregnancy, regardless of viability.” Polls have shown that 58 percent of Ohioans, including most Democrats and independent voters, intend to vote yes. But a more recent poll showed less support for the amendment — still a bare majority — among people who were shown the summary rather than the actual amendment. The state legislature has banned abortions after around six weeks of pregnancy since 2019, but that ban has been on hold pending a ruling from the state Supreme Court, whose members are believed to oppose a right to abortion. Supporters of the measure have appealed to concern about government overreach, arguing that politicians should not have control over private health care decisions. Anti-abortion groups have leaned into Americans’ disapproval of abortions late in pregnancy, with ads arguing the amendment would allow “partial birth abortions.” The phrase refers to a kind of abortion procedure that has been banned by federal law since 2007. Abortions after 21 weeks are extremely rare and usually because of severe medical diagnoses.






Article: 10
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Abortion Bans Fail in South Carolina and Nebraska
Author: Adeel Hassan and Eliza Fawcett
Publication_Date: Published April 27, 2023 Updated May 1, 2023
Article_Content: The News South Carolina and Nebraska, two conservative states that have been pushing to ban abortion, on Thursday both failed to pass new bills prohibiting the procedure, preserving wide access to abortion in those states and handing surprise victories to abortion rights advocates. In Nebraska, a bill to ban most abortions after six weeks of pregnancy — a strict prohibition that would outlaw the procedure before most women know they are pregnant — failed to advance in the state legislature, making it unlikely to move forward for the remainder of this year’s legislative session. The bill fell one vote short of the 33 needed in order to advance, after two senators did not vote. Gov. Jim Pillen, a Republican who had supported the bill, said after the vote that it was “unacceptable for senators to be present not voting on such a momentous vote.” Mr. Pillen, who described himself as “a staunch defender of life,” said he was “profoundly disappointed” by the outcome. In South Carolina, the Senate rejected a bill that would ban most abortions in the state. The bill had already been passed by the House, but the Senate’s five women — three of whom are Republicans — opposed the bill and spoke forcefully against it. A woman in a green dress stands in the center of a crowd of women smiling and clapping. From left, State Senators Megan Hunt, Jen Day and Machaela Cavanaugh celebrated in the rotunda of the Nebraska State Capitol after an abortion bill failed to advance on Thursday. Why It Matters The bills, if they had passed, were likely to be signed into law by Republican governors, and would have been a significant change for state residents. Currently, both South Carolina and Nebraska allow abortion up to around 22 weeks. “Nebraska politicians today voted to keep private health care decisions where they belong — in the exam room between a doctor and their patient,” said Andi Curry Grubb, executive director of Planned Parenthood Advocates of Nebraska. Both states would have joined a growing list of Republican-dominated states with severe restrictions on abortion. So far, 14 states have active bans on nearly all abortions, though some allow exceptions for rape and danger to the life of the mother. Georgia and Florida also ban abortions after six weeks of pregnancy, but Florida’s ban is on hold pending a court challenge. South Carolina has become a destination for women seeking abortions as its southern neighbors have shut down access to abortion. The proposed ban would have prohibited abortion at all stages of pregnancy, with narrow exceptions for rape and incest before 12 weeks. During discussion of the bill, State Senator Mia McLeod, an independent, appealed to her colleagues to protect the rights of women and girls. “If this bill passes, a baby will be forced to carry and deliver another baby, even if it costs her her life,” she said. Background Last year, the U.S. Supreme Court ended the constitutional right to abortion in its Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization decision, effectively sending the issue of regulation back to individual states. This year alone, more than 600 abortion-related bills have been proposed in the states. Slightly more than half of them aim to restrict access to the procedure. Republicans, however, have struggled to reach consensus on just how far abortion restrictions ought to go, and some in the G.O.P. see the issue as a political liability after midterm losses. What’s Next With a few weeks left in its session, South Carolina could still pass an abortion ban. The Senate has already passed a six-week ban, which the House could take up. Both chambers have been unable to reach agreement on a ban. And the state’s Supreme Court ruled earlier this year that its Constitution includes the right to abortion, but said the state still had an interest in regulating the procedure.








Article: 11
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Planned Parenthood Will Once Again Provide Abortions in Wisconsin
Author: Julie Bosman
Publication_Date: Sept. 14, 2023 
Article_Content: The clinic had suspended abortions during a legal battle over an 1849 law, which is ongoing. Demonstrators protested outside the State Capitol in Madison, Wis., last year. Planned Parenthood said on Thursday it would resume providing abortions in Wisconsin, where the procedure has been largely unavailable since the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade more than a year ago. The decision to restart services is a victory for abortion-rights groups in the state, where the issue has reshaped politics and defined a State Supreme Court election. Wisconsin had an abortion ban from 1849 that was still on the books, but it had been unenforceable since Roe v. Wade made abortion legal nationwide in 1973. Josh Kaul, the state attorney general and a Democrat, sued to overturn the law days after the U.S. Supreme Court decision in 2022. The announcement from Planned Parenthood came after a judge in Dane County, which includes Madison, issued a preliminary ruling in July saying that she did not believe the 1849 law made abortion illegal. “There is no such thing as an ‘1849 abortion ban’ in Wisconsin,” she wrote. The judge’s final ruling is expected in the coming weeks. The dispute is likely to be decided by a higher court. Beginning on Monday, patients can receive abortions at Planned Parenthood clinics in Madison and Milwaukee, the organization said.  “With the recent confirmation from the court that there is not an enforceable abortion ban in Wisconsin, our staff can now provide the full scope of sexual and reproductive health care to anyone in Wisconsin who needs it, no matter what,” Tanya Atkinson, president and chief executive of Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin, said in a statement. Tracking Abortion Bans Across the Country Gov. Tony Evers of Wisconsin, also a Democrat, called the announcement “critically important news for Wisconsin women.” “Our fight to restore the same reproductive rights and freedoms Wisconsinites had up until the day the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe must continue,” Mr. Evers said. Opponents of abortion denounced the decision. “This is a devastating day for preborn children and women facing unexpected pregnancies in Wisconsin,” Gracie Skogman, the legislative director for Wisconsin Right to Life, said in a statement. “Planned Parenthood is once again showing that they value profit over the lives of vulnerable women and children.” For the last year, many women in Wisconsin who were seeking abortions traveled over state lines into Illinois, frequently to a clinic in Waukegan, Ill., a city only miles from the border with Wisconsin. Planned Parenthood of Illinois saw a 600 percent increase in patients from Wisconsin since Roe was overturned, the organization said. Wisconsin, a critical swing state in the 2024 presidential contest, is in the midst of deep, ongoing political clashes over abortion, redistricting and elections. In April, voters elected Janet Protasiewicz, a liberal candidate, to the State Supreme Court. She made her support of abortion rights clear, and won the seat by 11 percentage points that gave the court a new 4-to-3 liberal majority. But Republicans in the State Legislature have threatened to impeach Justice Protasiewicz before she can rule on any case, hoping to block her from voting in favor of abortion rights and help toss out heavily gerrymandered legislative maps that favor Republicans. On Thursday, Republicans, who hold a majority in the State Senate, voted to fire Meagan Wolfe, the state’s nonpartisan head of elections. Ms. Wolfe, the Wisconsin Elections Commission administrator since 2018, has been targeted by conservatives who say she is responsible for a lack of confidence in elections, though a 14-month investigation into the state results of the 2020 election found no evidence of significant fraud. A legal battle over Ms. Wolfe’s firing is expected to follow.






Article: 11
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Iowa Republicans Move to Sharply Limit Abortion
Author: Mitch Smith
Publication_Date: Published July 11, 2023 Updated July 13, 2023
Article_Content: Gov. Kim Reynolds called the Legislature for a special session to consider sweeping new restrictions on abortion. Protesters outside a public hearing during a special session of the Iowa legislature on Tuesday. Less than a month after a deadlocked Iowa Supreme Court left a six-week abortion ban unenforceable, lawmakers returned to the State Capitol on Tuesday and passed a nearly identical set of restrictions on the procedure. Gov. Kim Reynolds, a Republican who said, “I believe the pro-life movement is the most important human rights cause of our time” when she called the special session on abortion, plans to sign the bill into law on Friday, her office said. “The voices of Iowans and their democratically elected representatives cannot be ignored any longer, and justice for the unborn should not be delayed,” Governor Reynolds said in a statement on Tuesday night. The session further cemented Iowa’s sharp political shift to the right, and was set to end its increasingly rare status as a Republican-led state where abortions are allowed up to 20 weeks post-fertilization, or roughly 22 weeks into pregnancy. The new limits would add Iowa to a list of conservative states including Indiana, North Dakota and South Carolina that have passed abortion restrictions since the U.S. Supreme Court ended the national right to abortion last year. But courts in some of those states have temporarily blocked the laws from taking effect, pending the outcome of lawsuits from abortion providers who say the laws violate various provisions in state constitutions. And Iowa providers and advocates for abortion rights filed suit within hours of the Iowa vote on Wednesday, saying it was unconstitutional under the standard of “undue burden.” As the legislature began its special session on Tuesday, Iowans on both sides of the debate gathered at the Capitol in Des Moines, holding signs with messages like, “My Body, My Choice” and wearing T-shirts with slogans like, “Unborn Lives Matter.” Every seat was claimed inside a public hearing before a House committee, with scores of others standing in the hallways and chanting, “Abortion bans have got to go.” The call for a special session infuriated but did not surprise Iowa Democrats, who celebrated the court’s deadlock a few weeks ago but knew that Republicans, who control both chambers of the Legislature, were likely to try again. The Iowa Supreme Court’s deadlock left in place a lower court’s injunction that blocked enforcement of a six-week ban, but it also left unsettled the broader question of whether such restrictions were permissible under the state’s Constitution. Supporters of abortion rights said the new limits passed by lawmakers endangered women’s health and ran counter to public opinion. Gov. Kim Reynolds on a stage in front of a red backdrop with white stars. Gov. Kim Reynolds of Iowa during a panel discussion in Orlando, Fla., last year. “They have overplayed their hand,” Senator Pam Jochum, the leader of the Democratic minority, said in an interview at the Capitol on Tuesday. But while members of her caucus fought the measure, Ms. Jochum said the large Republican margins limited their options. The bill passed by Republicans allows for abortions until the point where there is what the bill calls “detectable fetal heartbeat,” a term that medical groups dispute.  The legislation assumes this is roughly six weeks of pregnancy, before many women know they are pregnant. The legislation includes exceptions after that point for rape or incest, when the woman’s life is in serious danger or she faces a risk of certain permanent injuries, or when fetal abnormalities “incompatible with life” are present. In public testimony on Tuesday, supporters and opponents of the legislation each told wrenching personal stories and described how religious beliefs shaped their views on abortion. The Rev. Katie Styrt, a Presbyterian pastor from Davenport, described seeking an abortion several years ago when she was pregnant with twins, one of whom was found to have severe complications and would not be able to survive. She said she had hoped to save the other twin by getting the abortion. “We had the health care and the doctors we needed to get us where we needed to be,” Ms. Styrt said. “Now, if this bill passes, we won’t.” Others said passing the restrictions was a moral imperative. “I understand both sides: I was a woman who exercised choice to have an abortion; this is why I advocate to prevent other women experiencing what I have gone through,” Kristi Judkins, the executive director of Iowa Right to Life, told legislators. “People have labeled me a hypocrite, but I ask you: Who here would tell someone to make the same negative, permanent, life-changing mistake?” Sweeping restrictions on abortion in Iowa would further erode access to the procedure in the Midwest, where it is already limited in many states. But a new law would almost certainly face a fresh legal challenge, and the outcome in the courts would again be uncertain. Abortion is banned in almost all cases in the bordering states of Missouri, South Dakota and Wisconsin, and a new 12-week ban recently passed in Nebraska. Illinois and Minnesota, which are led by Democrats, have permissive abortion laws and could become destinations for Iowa women seeking abortions. More than 3,700 abortions were performed in Iowa in 2021, according to state data, most of them by medication. The new limits passed on Tuesday after hours of intense debate that extended well into the evening. “If this bill becomes law, women will die in Iowa,” State Representative Beth Wessel-Kroeschell, a Democrat, told her colleagues. “Common sense has walked out the door.” Republicans defended the bill, and voted down several amendments from Democrats that would have expanded exceptions. “Unborn people, in my opinion, are babies, and government’s job is to protect the rights of every person, including babies,” State Representative Brad Sherman, a Republican, said on the House floor. A Des Moines Register-Mediacom Iowa poll from this year found that 61 percent of adults in the state believed abortion should be legal in most or all cases, while 35 percent believed it should be illegal in most or all cases. But last year, when Democrats nationally ran on abortion rights, retaking state legislative chambers and holding governorships, the party floundered in Iowa, which not so long ago was viewed as a state where voters might swing to either party. Governor Reynolds won re-election in a landslide, Republicans swept the state’s congressional seats and voters unseated the attorney general and treasurer, both Democrats who had held office for decades. Though Iowans voted twice for President Barack Obama, and Democrats held a majority in the State Senate as recently as 2016, the state is now solidly Republican. Only one Democrat, Rob Sand, the state auditor, still holds statewide office, and the national Democratic Party has moved to push Iowa’s coveted first-in-the-nation caucuses later in the nominating calendar. Republicans, for their part, have wasted no time remaking Iowa in a more conservative image. Ms. Reynolds signed laws this year that banned hormone therapy for transgender children, loosened child labor rules and limited Mr. Sand’s powers. And with Republicans keeping Iowa at the start of their nominating calendar, the party’s presidential hopefuls have been flooding the state. State Representative Jennifer Konfrst, the leader of the Democratic minority in the Iowa House, said the state was not as conservative as recent election results suggested. Although Democrats are not likely to retake a legislative chamber next year, Ms. Konfrst said they saw an opportunity to expand their statehouse numbers in 2024 and regain a foothold in the congressional delegation. New abortion limits, she said, would have the potential to mobilize Democratic voters who sat out the last election. “Our best case is going to be to hold Republicans accountable for going against what Iowans want,” said Ms. Konfrst, who represents parts of suburban Des Moines. “The fact that they’re hurrying it through in July, a year before an election, shows that politically they know this is unpopular.” But Iowa Republicans have made no efforts to hide their support for abortion restrictions, and they have kept winning elections anyway. “Iowans have elected us on the promise to defend the unborn, and we will continue to follow through on that promise,” State Representative Matt Windschitl, the majority leader in the House, said. The same poll that showed broad support for abortion rights this year also showed that more Iowans approved than disapproved of how the State Legislature was doing its job. And nearly two-thirds of those surveyed disapproved of President Biden’s job performance.






Article: 12
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: In Texas, Local Laws to Prevent Travel for Abortions Gain Momentum
Author: J. David Goodman
Publication_Date: Oct. 24, 2023
Article_Content: Lubbock County, home to more than 300,000 near the New Mexico border, has become the fourth and largest Texas county to bar travel assistance for abortions. In recent months, abortion opponents in Texas have succeeded in passing a growing number of local ordinances to prevent people from helping women travel to have abortions in nearby states that still allow the procedure. On Monday, Lubbock County, a conservative hub of more than 300,000 residents near the border with New Mexico, became the largest county yet to enact such a ban. The county commissioners court, during a public meeting that drew occasionally impassioned testimony, voted to make it illegal for anyone to transport a pregnant woman through the county, or pay for her travel, for the purpose of seeking an abortion. The county, which includes the city of Lubbock and Texas Tech University, joined three other far smaller counties — one along the New Mexico border and two others in the middle of the state — in passing ordinances that were drafted in part by the architect of Texas’s six-week abortion ban, adopted in 2021 even before the U.S. Supreme Court overturned of Roe v. Wade last year. The city of Amarillo, in the Texas Panhandle, on Tuesday held an hourslong public hearing to consider a similar ordinance, which would apply to a network of roads and highways that pass through the city of 200,000 and lead toward New Mexico and Colorado, states where many Texas women have traveled for procedures. “These abortion trafficking ordinances really are the next stage in an abortion-free America,” said Mark Lee Dickson, an anti-abortion activist who has traveled the state in support of the ordinances. He said he expected several more counties to adopt similar measures in the next few months.  The ordinances have been drafted by Mr. Dickson and Jonathan F. Mitchell, the former solicitor general of Texas who crafted the state’s 2021 abortion ban, and they rely on the same enforcement mechanism as the abortion ban: lawsuits by private citizens. They specifically prohibit the police, sheriffs or other county officers or employees from enforcing the ban — a means of avoiding an immediate court challenge and possible injunction. Practically speaking, someone would have to learn of a person assisting a pregnant woman with travel out of state for a procedure in order to bring a suit. The ordinances will most likely function like the six-week abortion ban, which attracted few cases but had a chilling effect. Did you try to get an abortion in the past year? We want to hear from you.As part of our coverage of abortion access, we are looking for people to share their experiences. Some legal scholars said the ordinances could run afoul of constitutional protections. “Even Justice Kavanaugh, in his concurring opinion in the Dobbs decision overruling Roe v. Wade, noted that a state would be violating the constitutional right to interstate travel if it sought to prohibit women from traveling out of state to seek a lawful abortion,” said Jeffrey B. Abramson, emeritus professor of government and law at the University of Texas at Austin. Mr. Dickson said the ordinances are enforceable because they apply to someone assisting a pregnant woman with travel — including financial support — and do not prohibit a woman from driving herself or traveling by other means. “We don’t see this as a travel ban,” he said. “We see this as a prohibition on abortion trafficking.” In a statement, a spokeswoman for Planned Parenthood of Greater Texas, Autumn Keiser, called the ordinances “unnecessary, confusing and fear-inducing barriers to essential health care.” The Texas affiliates of Planned Parenthood, which have stopped providing abortions in the state, are also fighting a case brought by the Texas attorney general, Ken Paxton, that accuses the organization of defrauding the Medicaid program. That suit must go to trial, Matthew J. Kacsmaryk, a federal judge appointed by Donald Trump, ruled on Monday. Texas is seeking nearly $2 billion. That Lubbock County commissioners would adopt the travel ordinance — in a 3 to 0 vote — was not a surprise. Voters in the city of Lubbock approved a ban on abortions in 2021, shortly before the statewide six-week prohibition went into effect. On Monday, a steady stream of residents spoke in favor of the measure, often on religious grounds. “I come to this from God’s side,” said Tonya Gilliam, who told the commissioners that she had an abortion nearly 50 years ago. “This is very dear to God. Life is everything.” Other women voiced opposition to the ordinance, and support for abortion rights. “There are thousands of people out there who couldn’t come, because they have to work, and believe that a woman’s body is her decision," said Charlotte Dunham, who told the commissioners that she believed abortion should be legal. The county judge, Curtis Parrish, said he did not oppose the intent of the ordinance but abstained from the vote after saying he believed the ordinance, “as written, has many legal problems.” Mr. Parrish also said that he wondered what impact the ordinance would really have, given that it only applied to the unincorporated portions of the county and not, for example, to the city of Lubbock. He said a person could still drive a pregnant woman to the airport in Lubbock for a flight to New Mexico for an abortion and not be in violation of the law. Gilbert Flores, a county commissioner, also abstained from the vote. “I am 77 years old,” he said, describing times in his life when his rights were violated. “Now, what’s in front of me right now is, do I have the right, do I have the power, do I want the authority to tell these women what to do, violate their rights?” he said. “I have a difficult time with that.” Another commissioner, Terence Kovar, said he had once helped out in a crisis pregnancy center and that a vote for the ordinance would be in keeping with his anti-abortion views, and those of his constituents. “This may be a way that mothers think about it,” he said in an interview. “Instead of driving all the way to New Mexico, they come and find one of the local places here to help them get through a troubling time and end up having the kid.”




Article: 13
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Ohio Will Vote on Abortion Rights
Author: Kate Zernike
Publication_Date: July 25, 2023
Article_Content: Backers of a proposal to establish a right to abortion in the Ohio Constitution submitted enough valid signatures to put the question on the November ballot. The Republican-controlled Ohio legislature has tried to head off a proposed abortion-rights amendment with a measure, now before voters in a special election, that would make constitutional amendments harder to pass. Ohio voters will decide in November whether to amend their state Constitution to establish a right to abortion, after state officials said on Tuesday that proponents had submitted over 495,000 valid signatures from voters, more than enough to put the question on the ballot. Supporters of the measure still face another hurdle. Republicans in the state legislature want to make the amendment harder to approve, and have put up a ballot question of their own that would raise the threshold of voters required to amend the state constitution to 60 percent instead of a simple majority. That question is on the ballot in a special election on Aug. 8; early voting on that amendment is already in progress. In a statement Tuesday, Lauren Blauvelt and Lauren Beene of Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights, the coalition behind the ballot measure, hailed the announcement. “Every person deserves respect, dignity, and the right to make reproductive health care decisions, including those related to their own pregnancy, miscarriage care, and abortion free from government interference,” they said in the statement. “Now that the petition drive is complete, we’re eager to continue the campaign to enshrine those rights in Ohio’s Constitution and ensure that Ohioans will never again be subject to draconian reproductive health care policies imposed by extremists.” Anti-abortion groups portray the amendment as “extreme,” and have argued that it would permit abortion “until birth” and also enshrine a right for minors to undergo gender-transition surgery without their parents’ consent, even though the amendment allows the state to prohibit abortion later in pregnancy and does not include any language about gender transition. They urged voters to make the abortion amendment harder to pass by participating in the special election in August. “Knowing the serious danger of this amendment and that these out-of-state special interest groups still have millions to spend to get it passed, it is even more imperative that every pro-life Ohioan votes yes on Issue 1 this August to ensure that our Constitution, our preborn, and our families are protected,” Peter Range, the chief executive of Ohio Right to Life, said in a statement.  Abortion rights advocates have put increasing hopes on state ballot measures in the year since the Supreme Court reversed of Roe v. Wade, which for five decades established a national right to abortion. They are encouraged by public opinion polls showing that most Americans — and a majority in all but a few states — think abortion should be legal in at least some cases. A USA Today Network/Suffolk University poll in early July found that 58 percent of likely voters in Ohio backed the amendment establishing a right to abortion, with 32 percent opposed. Three women stand at a high table in a brew pub that holds petition forms, signs and buttons. Riley Taylor, Jade Martinez and Tom Parrish gathered signatures in Cincinnati in April to put the proposed Reproductive Freedom Amendment on the ballot in November. Supporters of abortion rights prevailed in six out of six measures on ballot measures that were put to voters last year, including those in conservative states like Kentucky and Kansas. But none of those measures received more than 60 percent of the vote. Anti-abortion lawmakers and groups are trying to stay one step ahead by trying to making measures harder to place on the ballot or to pass. Ohio has become a test case. The state’s Republican-led legislature passed a law in 2019 that would ban abortion after roughly six weeks of pregnancy — before many women know they are pregnant — with exceptions to save the life of the mother or to prevent “major impairment” of a bodily function, but not for rape or incest. That law took effect after Roe v. Wade was overturned last year, but a county court judge put a hold on it, leaving abortion legal in Ohio until 22 weeks. The ballot measure on abortion would amend the Ohio Constitution to add a right much like the one that was protected by Roe. It would establish a right to abortion, but allow the state to prohibit the procedure after the fetus would be viable outside the womb, generally around 23 or 24 weeks. It would also allow limits on abortion before viability, as long as those laws used the “least restrictive means to advance the individual’s health” according to “widely accepted and evidence-based standards of care.” The question on the Aug. 8 special-election ballot would raise the threshold of yes votes necessary to amend the constitution to 60 percent. Proponents of future amendments would have to collect signatures from at least 5 percent of the voters in all 88 of the state’s counties; under current law, they only need 5 percent of voters in half the counties. And the measure would do away with a 10-day “curing” period that allows proponents to collect additional signatures to make up for any that authorities strike as invalid. Frank LaRose sits at a desk in a modern office, his chin in his hand, with a view of another office building in the window behind him.  Secretary of State Frank LaRose, who oversees elections in Ohio, is a Republican who has supported bans on abortion. The Republican-led legislature passed a law earlier this year banning most August elections, saying they were needlessly expensive and had such low turnout that they were anti-democratic. Mr. LaRose, the secretary of state, himself had testified that they allowed “just a handful of voters” to make weighty decisions. But the legislature approved a special election in August this year for the sole purpose of considering a constitutional amendment that would make it more difficult to propose and pass other amendments. A simple majority is required to enact it. Though Republicans have said the move was aimed directly at blocking abortion rights, the language on the special-election ballot does not include the word “abortion.” That may make it difficult for supporters of abortion rights to rally their voters, especially in the dog days of summer. Backers of the abortion rights amendment submitted a total of roughly 710,000 signatures collected from all 88 counties. Under current state law, they needed 413,466 valid signatures for the measure to qualify for the November ballot.





Article: 14
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Oklahoma Supreme Court Rules New Abortion Bans Unconstitutional
Author:  Jacey Fortin
Publication_Date: May 31, 2023
Article_Content: The News Oklahoma’s Supreme Court said on Wednesday that two laws passed last year that ban most abortions are unconstitutional. But the ruling does not affect a law passed in 1910 which still prohibits most abortions in the state, unless they are necessary to save the life of the mother. The laws that were struck down by the court were civil laws that had relied on suits from private citizens to enforce them. Both had made exceptions for cases involving a “medical emergency.” But the justices took issue with that language in their 6-3 ruling, which suggested that the exceptions were too narrow. They maintained that a woman has a constitutional right to end a pregnancy in order to save her life, without specifying the need for a medical emergency. A group of protesters line a street, and among them is a woman holding a pink sign that reads “Together We Fight for All.” Demonstrators gathered in Tulsa, Okla., after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June 2022. Why It Matters Oklahoma is among a number of Republican-led states that moved to ban abortion in anticipation of the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade last year. Legal challenges were quick to follow, and many cases ended up before state supreme courts. Those courts have become critical arbiters in deciding abortion access, and a new political front in the nation’s abortion battles. In some conservative states, courts have decided that their state constitutions protect abortion rights. The decision also highlighted legal complications around how abortion restrictions and exceptions might be interpreted in cases where a woman’s life is at risk. Doctors in other states with abortion bans said they have struggled to provide care for patients without breaking the law. “We hope that this decision provides some clarity, and that doctors can move forward,” said Rabia Muqaddam of the Center for Reproductive Rights, who was the lead lawyer for the groups challenging the law. “Now they can provide care to patients who are facing difficult health circumstances, and they can rely on their medical judgment.” Background Challenges to Oklahoma’s anti-abortion laws were filed by abortion rights organizations including Oklahoma Call for Reproductive Justice, a nonprofit volunteer organization based in Oklahoma City, and medical practitioners including the Tulsa Women’s Reproductive Clinic. The laws that were struck down on Wednesday had been modeled on legislation that took effect in Texas in 2021, which banned abortion after about six weeks of pregnancy, and relied on civilian instead of criminal enforcement to work around court challenges. Another law passed in Oklahoma last year, which had made it a felony to perform an abortion “except to save the life of a pregnant woman in a medical emergency,” was struck down by the state’s Supreme Court in March. In their opinion on Wednesday, the justices cited their March decision, which was similarly concerned with the potential for strict interpretations of the term “medical emergency.” What’s Next Abortion is still largely illegal in Oklahoma because of the 1910 law that came back into effect when Roe was overturned. “Except for certain circumstances outlined in that statute, abortion is still unlawful in the State of Oklahoma,” Gentner Drummond, the state’s attorney general, said in a statement on Wednesday. “This ruling, while providing clarity in emergency situations, does not change the landscape of care significantly,” said Emily Wales, the president of Planned Parenthood Great Plains, which was among the organizations that challenged the laws.





Article: 15
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Wisconsin Judge Allows Challenge to Abortion Law to Proceed
Author: Mitch Smith
Publication_Date: July 7, 2023
Article_Content: The preliminary ruling on the law, passed long before Roe v. Wade, gave hope to abortion-rights supporters who want to restore access to the procedure. A demonstration for abortion rights in January in the rotunda of Wisconsin’s Capitol. Abortion-rights supporters in Wisconsin secured an incremental but important legal victory on Friday when a judge allowed a lawsuit seeking to restore abortion access in the state to proceed. The case, which centers on a law passed in 1849 that has been seen as banning abortion, could eventually end up at the State Supreme Court. Liberal justices will be in the majority on that court starting next month after winning a contentious judicial election this year that focused largely on abortion. In 2022, after the U.S. Supreme Court eliminated the national right to abortion, clinics stopped providing abortions in Wisconsin, a closely divided state where Republicans control the Legislature and a Democrat holds the governorship. Though Democrats have argued that the 1849 law should no longer be seen as barring women from obtaining abortions, others, including county prosecutors, have publicly disagreed, creating an unsettled legal landscape in which doctors providing abortions could face felony charges. In her preliminary ruling on Friday that allowed the case to advance, Judge Diane Schlipper indicated that she did not believe that doctors could be prosecuted for performing consensual abortions before a fetus reached viability. She wrote that “there is no such thing as an ‘1849 abortion ban’ in Wisconsin.”  The decision by Judge Schlipper, of the Circuit Court in Dane County, gave credence to the legal arguments used by abortion-rights supporters and kept open a judicial path to restore abortion access. But the immediate effect of her decision was limited, and the final say on the case is widely expected to come from a higher court. “Today’s ruling is a major victory in our fight to restore reproductive freedom in Wisconsin,” said Attorney General Josh Kaul, a Democrat who brought the lawsuit challenging the measure, in a statement. “While this ruling does not resolve the case and won’t be the final word in this litigation,” he said, it made clear that the law “should not be interpreted to criminalize consensual abortions.” The ruling on Friday stemmed from a request by Joel Urmanski, the district attorney in Sheboygan County and a defendant in the lawsuit, to dismiss the case. Mr. Urmanski, a Republican, had previously indicated to local reporters that he would be open to prosecuting abortion providers under the 1849 law if a case was presented to his office. Mr. Urmanski said in an email on Friday that he was in court and had not yet reviewed the ruling. He declined to comment further. Two lawyers representing him in the case did not immediately respond to emails seeking comment. Heather Weininger, the executive director of Wisconsin Right to Life, said in a statement that the ruling was “a devastating setback in our ongoing fight to protect Wisconsin’s pre-born children.” Abortion in Wisconsin has been a defining issue in recent campaigns, with both Mr. Kaul and Gov. Tony Evers, a Democrat, noting their support for abortion rights during successful re-election campaigns last year. But because Republicans have large majorities in the Legislature, in part because of gerrymandered districts, there is no immediate legislative path to repeal the 1849 measure or pass abortion protections. That has shifted attention to the judiciary, where conservatives were defending a one-seat majority on the State Supreme Court this year. In a spring election, a liberal jurist, Janet Protasiewicz, focused her campaign on her support for abortion rights. She won, meaning that the court’s liberal bloc will have a slim majority next month after she is sworn in. If the lawsuit that Judge Schlipper ruled on Friday ever makes its way to the Wisconsin Supreme Court, Judge Protasiewicz could be the deciding vote.






Article: 16
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Judge Puts South Carolina Abortion Ban on Hold
Author: Ava Sasani
Publication_Date: May 26, 2023
Article_Content: The News A South Carolina judge on Friday temporarily blocked a new law restricting abortion access after six weeks of pregnancy. The order came just one day after Gov. Henry McMaster, a Republican, signed the six-week ban into law, and temporarily restores abortion access in the state to up to 22 weeks of pregnancy. Greenville Women’s Clinic — an abortion provider in South Carolina — and Planned Parenthood South Atlantic sued the state shortly after Mr. McMaster signed the law. “The status quo should be maintained” until the Supreme Court can weigh in, said Judge Clifton Newman in his order blocking the new ban. “It’s going to end up there.” Governor Henry McMaster of South Carolina, wearing a dark suit and red tie, stands in front of a wooden podium. Gov. Henry McMaster of South Carolina quickly signed the new law banning most abortions after six weeks of pregnancy. Why It Matters South Carolina has become an important access point for abortion in the South as other states in the region have banned the procedure. “Our doors remain open, and we are here to provide compassionate and judgment-free health care to all South Carolinians,” said Jenny Black, president and chief executive of Planned Parenthood South Atlantic. Background South Carolina legislators struggled for months to come to an agreement on an abortion ban after the Supreme Court last year overturned Roe v. Wade and eliminated the national right to abortion. Republicans fought over how far a ban should go, and what exceptions to allow. Three Republican women were part of a group of legislators who had tried to block a near-total ban. The ban that finally passed prohibits most abortions after six weeks of pregnancy and requires any woman seeking an abortion to first have two in-person doctor’s visits and two ultrasounds. The law allows exceptions for victims of rape and incest, and in cases of fatal fetal abnormalities or where the woman’s life and health are at risk, but those exceptions are only available up to 12 weeks of pregnancy. The ban is similar to an earlier six-week ban overturned by the State Supreme Court last year, known as a heartbeat bill, because cardiac activity can be detected around that time. The court ruled that the South Carolina Constitution provides a right to privacy that includes the right to abortion. “While I respect Judge Newman’s decision, I remain convinced that the heartbeat bill is constitutional and that the Supreme Court will agree,” said the Senate’s president, Thomas Alexander, a Republican. A crowd of people holding signs in favor of abortion rights. Abortion rights demonstrators gathered in the South Carolina Statehouse earlier this month. What’s Next The case now heads to the State Supreme Court. Republican legislators said they made changes in the new law to address the court’s objections to the previous law. There has also been a change to the court that some feel might work in their favor: The justice who wrote the January decision was the only woman on the court. She has since retired and was replaced by a man, making South Carolina the only state with an all-male high court.






Article: 17
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Ohio Moves Closer to Ballot Issue That Would Protect Abortion Rights
Author:  Kate Zernike
Publication_Date: July 6, 2023
Article_Content: Supporters of protecting abortion in the state’s Constitution submitted enough signatures to get on the November ballot. But another vote in August could make it harder to win. Protesters at an abortion rights rally in Dayton, Ohio, last year. Ohio moved one step closer to becoming the next big test case in the nation’s fight over abortion, after supporters of a measure that would ask voters to establish a right to abortion in the state’s Constitution this week said they had filed more than enough signatures to put it on the ballot in November. Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights said on Wednesday that it had collected roughly 710,000 signatures across all of the state’s 88 counties over the last 12 weeks. Under state law, the coalition needed 413,466 to qualify for the ballot. State election officials now have until July 25 to verify the signatures. Supporters of abortion rights are turning to ballot measures in the aftermath of the ruling last year by the United States Supreme Court overturning Roe v. Wade, which for 50 years had guaranteed a right to abortion in the federal Constitution. They are betting on polls showing that public opinion increasingly supports some right to abortion, and opposes the bans and stricter laws that conservative state legislatures have enacted since the court’s decision. Voters in six states, including conservative ones such as Kentucky and Kansas, voted to protect or establish a right to abortion in their constitutions in last year’s elections, and abortion rights advocates in about 10 other states are considering similar plans. Anti-abortion advocates have become more reluctant to use ballot measures, but that does not mean they have stopped pushing to enact stricter limits. In Iowa, where the State Supreme Court last month declined in a deadlocked vote to lift a block on a near-total abortion ban, anti-abortion advocates have explored adding an amendment to the state’s Constitution saying that there is no right to abortion.  On Wednesday, Gov. Kim Reynolds, a Republican, led a different approach, announcing that she was ordering a special session of the Legislature to convene next week with the sole purpose of enacting another ban. The court’s decision, she said, “disregards the will of Iowa voters and lawmakers.” In Ohio, at a news conference after delivering the truckload of signed petitions on Wednesday, members of Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights expressed confidence about a November vote. “We know from providing 50 years of abortion care that people from every corner of this state need this service,” said Sri Thakkilapati, a founder of the group and the executive director of the Cleveland abortion clinic Preterm. “And we know from collecting signatures in every single one of Ohio’s 88 counties that people support this right.” But the November ballot measure is not the only one that will carry big stakes for the future of abortion in Ohio. Republicans who oppose abortion rights — and who control the state’s General Assembly — have proposed another measure that would make it harder to pass the ballot measure. Republican leaders in the legislature have placed a measure on the ballot for a special election in August that would raise the threshold required to pass any ballot measure amending the state’s Constitution to 60 percent, from a simple majority. They aimed that measure — which would require 50 percent of voters to pass — squarely at the abortion question. Earlier this year the same Republicans passed a law eliminating almost all August elections, arguing that they were expensive and had such low turnout as to be undemocratic. While summer elections tend to have low turnouts and favor those sponsoring the measures, Republicans in Kansas who attempted to strike a right to abortion from the state’s Constitution last August failed, with an unexpectedly high proportion of residents turning out to reject it. The August measure in Ohio, however, will not specifically mention abortion, and it’s not clear that abortion rights advocates will be able to energize their supporters as effectively as their counterparts in Kansas did. Michael Gonidakis, the longtime president of Ohio Right to Life, cast doubt on the significance of the signatures delivered by abortion rights supporters this week. He noted that a group that attempted an amendment on criminal justice in 2018 submitted more than 730,000 signatures, but fewer than half were declared valid. And 63 percent of voters ultimately rejected the proposal. The Republican-led legislature in Ohio passed a law in 2019 banning abortion after six weeks of pregnancy — before many women know they are pregnant — with exceptions to save the life of the mother or prevent “major impairment” of a bodily function, but not for rape or incest. That law took effect after Roe was overturned, but a county court judge put a hold on it, saying that the Ohio Constitution provided a “fundamental right to abortion,” in part because it granted equal protection and benefit to women. That leaves abortion legal up until 22 weeks of pregnancy. The ballot measure would amend the Constitution to add “the Right to Reproductive Freedom with Protections for Health and Safety Amendment,” which in many ways resembles the protections established by Roe. It would establish a right to abortion but allow the procedure to be prohibited after the fetus is viable outside the womb, generally around 23 or 24 weeks. It would allow limits on abortion before viability so long as those laws used the “least restrictive means to advance the individual’s health” according to “widely accepted and evidence-based standards of care.” In a statement, the leaders of Ohioans United for Reproductive Rights declared that the amendment would “ensure patients and doctors, not government extremists, are in control of making private medical decisions.” But in a flurry of statements and Twitter posts, anti-abortion groups hinted that they intended to argue that the amendment is extreme. The anti-abortion coalition Protect Women Ohio insisted that signature collectors had lied about the amendment, and argued that it would “strip parents of their rights, permit minors to undergo sex-change operations without their parents’ knowledge or consent and allow painful abortion on demand through all nine months,” despite the language allowing the state to prohibit abortions after viability. In a Public Religion Research Institute poll in December, 66 percent of Ohio residents said abortion should be legal in all or most cases, up from 56 percent in December 2018. A correction was made on July 7, 2023: An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to the August election in which Ohio voters will be asked whether to raise the threshold for passing state constitutional amendments. It will be a special election, not a primary.






Article: 18
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Wyoming Becomes First State to Outlaw the Use of Pills for Abortion
Author:  David W. Chen and Pam Belluck
Publication_Date: March 17, 2023
Article_Content: The law is the only one in the nation to prohibit the use separate from an overall abortion ban and is part of a growing effort by conservative states to target the pills. Because the Supreme Court ended the constitutional right to an abortion, the fight over abortion access is now in the hands of the states. Wyoming on Friday became the first state to explicitly ban the use of pills for abortion, adding momentum to a growing push by conservative states and anti-abortion groups to target medication abortion, the method now used in a majority of pregnancy terminations in the United States. Wyoming’s new law comes as a preliminary ruling is expected soon by a Texas judge that could order the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to withdraw its approval of mifepristone, the first pill in the two-drug medication abortion regimen. Such a ruling, if it stands, could upend how abortion is provided nationally, affecting states where abortion is legal as well as states with bans and restrictions. Legislation to ban or add restrictions on medication abortion has been introduced in several states this year, including a bill in Texas that would not only prohibit medication abortion but would also require internet service providers to take steps to block medication abortion websites so people in Texas could not view them. In these states, proposals to block or restrict abortion pills have typically been introduced along with other anti-abortion measures, a reflection of the range of obstacles to abortion these states have tried to erect since the Supreme Court overturned the national right to abortion last June. Medication abortion is already outlawed in states that have near-total bans, since those bans already prohibit all forms of abortion. But Wyoming became the first state to outlaw the use of pills for abortion separate from an overall ban. Gov. Mark Gordon of Wyoming, a Republican, signed that state’s medication abortion ban on the same day that he said he would allow another more sweeping measure banning abortion to become law without his signature. That law, which takes effect on Sunday, would ban abortion under almost all circumstances, making it a felony to provide an abortion. “I have acted without bias and after extensive prayer, to allow these bills to become law,” Mr. Gordon wrote in a letter to Wyoming’s secretary of state released on Friday evening. Mr. Gordon said in the letter that he withheld his signature from the broader abortion ban because he feared it would complicate matters in an ongoing legal battle over an earlier abortion ban passed by Wyoming legislators. The broader ban outlaws medication abortion as well, and the abortion pill measure, called the Prohibiting Chemical Abortions Act, would mostly have the effect of adding additional penalties for medication abortion providers. A previously enacted abortion ban in the state has so far been blocked by the courts after providers and others filed suit claiming that the law violated the Wyoming state Constitution’s guarantee of freedom in health care decisions. The newly enacted abortion ban is an attempt to circumvent that constitutional provision by declaring that abortion is not health care.  Wyoming’s abortion pill law would take effect on July 1 and would make it illegal to “prescribe, dispense, distribute, sell or use any drug for the purpose of procuring or performing an abortion.” Doctors or anyone else found guilty of violating this law would be charged with a misdemeanor, punishable by up to six months in prison and a $9,000 fine. The law explicitly says that pregnant patients will be exempt from charges and penalties. Wyoming has only one clinic that has been providing abortions, Women’s Health & Family Care Clinic in Jackson, which provides only medication abortion, not the surgical procedure. “The impact of that legislation not only infringes on our constitutional rights, it actually causes harm,” said Dr. Giovannina Anthony, an obstetrician-gynecologist at the clinic. “Criminalizing evidence-based medicine is really what this boils down to, and that, in the end, honestly, will lead to maternal deaths and horrible outcomes for both mothers and babies.” Dr. Anthony is one of the plaintiffs in a lawsuit against Wyoming’s previously enacted abortion ban, which is pending review in the state’s court system. On Friday, the same plaintiffs filed a request for a temporary restraining order to block the new broader abortion ban, since that ban would otherwise take effect right away. A hearing on that request is scheduled for Wednesday, and Dr. Anthony said she and the other plaintiffs will also be filing a court challenge to the medication abortion ban. In the meantime, Dr. Anthony said, she will be canceling abortion appointments scheduled for Monday and Tuesday. “The number of women who pursue abortion in a rural state like this is relatively few compared to more highly populated states, but it still is a very chilling effect on our obstetric care,” she said. Adam Schwend, Western regional director for Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, an anti-abortion network, thanked Mr. Gordon for enacting the medication abortion ban, saying that “Wyoming’s new law will limit the abortion industry’s ability to jeopardize the health and safety of women and girls.” Mr. Schwend added that the law will help make Wyoming “one of the most pro-life states in the country.” Earlier versions of the medication abortion bill had named specific drugs: mifepristone and two brand-name versions of it as well as misoprostol, the second drug used in the medication abortion regimen. But doctors testified in objection, pointing out that misoprostol, in particular, had many other medical uses, including helping pregnant patients successfully give birth. The doctors raised concerns that pharmacists would be fearful of stocking any of the drugs, and some Republicans said names of abortion medications could simply be changed to get around the law. As a result, the final language was broadened to outlaw using any medication for abortion without mentioning specific drugs. At least three other bills have been introduced in 2023 that seek to ban medication abortion. In Iowa, the bill did not make it to a vote before the legislative session ended, and in Hawaii, a Democratic state, the bill seems unlikely to succeed. A bill introduced in Texas, a state that already bans abortion, includes many provisions that seek to close off any access to pills, including making it difficult for Texas patients to learn about or use abortion services outside of the state. The bill would make it illegal to manufacture, distribute or “provide an abortion-inducing drug in any manner to or from any person or location in this state.” It would also make it illegal to “create, edit, upload, publish, host, maintain, or register a domain name for an internet website, platform, or other interactive computer service that assists or facilitates a person’s effort in obtaining an abortion-inducing drug.” Many patients learn about abortion options from websites like Plan C, a clearinghouse of information about medication abortion. And a growing number of patients in states with abortion bans are arranging to receive pills through telemedicine websites like Aid Access, a European-based service that has pills shipped to any state from India, and Hey Jane, one of several American-based services that will provide pills to patients who travel to a state where abortion is legal and where they can receive the medication by mail in those states. In addition to Wyoming and states with near-total abortion bans, 15 states have enacted restrictions on access to medication abortion, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a research group supporting abortion rights. Those restrictions include requiring that the drugs be provided by a physician and requiring the patient have an in-person visit with a doctor. Several states, including Texas and Arizona, have outlawed the mailing of abortion pills, and bills to ban mailing pills have been introduced in at least three other states this year. “We are seeing efforts to further bar access to medication abortion because abortion opponents recognize that even with abortion bans in effect” patients are still able to obtain abortion pills, said Elizabeth Nash, state policy analyst for the Guttmacher Institute. “Now, abortion opponents have turned to the courts, attorneys general and state legislatures to further limit access to pills.” Since January, when newly elected legislatures began to convene for the first time since the Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization decision ended the national right to an abortion, more than 500 bills in states across the country have been proposed that are related to abortion. Some states where Democratic legislatures have strong — or even unexpected — majorities are moving to strengthen abortion protections. In Minnesota, the first bill of the 2023 legislature, which made it harder for future legislatures and governors to water down those protections, was signed in January by Gov. Tim Walz, a Democrat. In Michigan, the legislature repealed an abortion ban, and Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat, is expected to sign it. But a majority of new bills aim to restrict abortion access. And with several states now wrapping up their legislative sessions, bills are starting to land on governors’ desks. “These abortion bans should alarm everybody in every corner of our country,” said Mini Timmaraju, president of NARAL Pro-Choice America, which supports abortion rights. “This first-of-its-kind ban on medication abortion, as well as the total ban, are just the latest proof” of how far “anti-choice Republicans” will go to prohibit the procedure, she said. Under the other new Wyoming law, the Life Is a Human Right Act, performing an abortion or administering abortion medication would be considered a felony, punishable by up to five years in prison, and doctors would have their licenses revoked. The law bans abortion with narrow exceptions for rape, incest and dire risks to the pregnant patient’s life or health. “While other states are pushing an extreme abortion agenda, comparable to North Korea’s and China’s inhumane laws, Wyoming is a pro-life state, affirming that life is a human right and ensuring that women have real support,” said state Representative Rachel Rodriguez-Williams, the bill’s sponsor. Under the Wyoming Constitution, residents have the right to make their own health care decisions. So the new law stipulates: “Instead of being health care, abortion is the intentional termination of the life of an unborn baby.”






Article: 19
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Abortion has become politically fraught for Republicans.
Author: Amy Harmon, David W. Chen and Ava Sasani
Publication_Date: April 21, 2023
Article_Content: The Republican Party has struggled to contend with abortion since the Supreme Court eliminated the constitutional right to the procedure last summer and sent abortion policy to the states. Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida recently signed a six-week abortion ban into law. The Republican Party has struggled to contend with abortion since the Supreme Court eliminated the constitutional right to the procedure last summer and sent abortion policy to the states. So far, 13 conservative states ban most abortions. Georgia bans abortions at six weeks, before most women know they are pregnant. And that does not include bans enacted in other states, including a new six-week ban in Florida, that are not in effect because of court challenges. But other states are locked in debate over how far to go with restrictions or exceptions to existing bans. Conservatives have been split over how to approach the abortion issue after the victory of the Supreme Court decision was followed by midterm losses. This month, the victory of a liberal candidate in a pivotal race for the Wisconsin Supreme Court was partly down to the issue of abortion, which proved a powerful motivator for voters. Nebraska’s legislature advanced a six-week abortion ban this month — but a Republican co-signer of the bill recently proposed an amendment to shift the ban to 12 weeks. Republicans in conservative states have sought to balance pressure from their base to place more restrictions on abortion with broader support for the right to end a pregnancy. Public support for legal abortion has climbed to 65 percent this year from 55 percent in 2010, according to recent polling from the Public Religion Research Institute. Majorities of residents in 43 states say that abortion should be legal in most cases. Around 63 percent of Republicans said abortion should be illegal in most or all cases, according to the PRRI poll. Some Republican state leaders — particularly those with national ambitions — have sought to walk a delicate line on an issue that was once a party touchstone. “This just puts the issue front and center again, and in most states and most places, it inarguably helped Democrats in 2022,” said Mike DuHaime, a former political director of the Republican National Committee. “What Republicans need to do is get to a place where they talk less about the extremes.” Some Republicans are emphasizing an approach that focuses on providing resources and support for mothers and babies, as a way to mitigate the impact of bans. On Wednesday, Gov. Tate Reeves of Mississippi, where most abortions are banned, signed a package of bills into law, increasing tax credits for the state’s crisis pregnancy centers, which encourage women to give birth, and expanding the use of “safe havens,” a way for parents to surrender babies for adoption. Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida, who is expected to make a White House bid, recently signed that state’s six-week ban into law, despite the political complications it presents. The law is likely to help him court conservative and evangelical voters in a presidential primary, but could hurt him in a general election. The ban, one of the most restrictive in the country, stands to shut off abortion access for women in the Deep South who relied on Florida as a destination for the procedure. Senator Lindsey Graham’s proposal for a 15-week national abortion ban last September failed to garner support from other Senate Republicans. And former President Donald J. Trump has blamed the abortion issue for the underperformance of Republicans in the 2022 midterm elections.






Article: 20
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Gov. J.B. Pritzker of Illinois Starts Group to Promote Abortion Rights
Author: Maggie Astor
Publication_Date: Oct. 18, 2023
Article_Content: Mr. Pritzker’s organization, Think Big America, will support ballot measures to codify or restore abortion rights, seeking to elevate an issue that has energized Democrats. Gov. J.B. Pritzker of Illinois speaking in Chicago in June. Gov. J.B. Pritzker of Illinois is starting an advocacy group to promote abortion rights around the country, seeking to blunt the impact of the Supreme Court’s decision overturning Roe v. Wade and to elevate an issue that has energized Democrats in elections. Mr. Pritzker, who easily won re-election last year, has not said how much of his own money he will invest in the new organization, but he is worth billions of dollars. The new organization, Think Big America, will help fund state ballot measures — typically expensive endeavors — to codify abortion rights in states whose legislatures have enacted or could enact abortion bans. Voters have consistently supported such measures since the court did away with the constitutional right to an abortion last year, approving them in every state where they have been offered and, conversely, rejecting abortion restrictions in every state where they have been proposed. One such measure will be on the ballot in Ohio next month: a constitutional amendment that would establish a right to abortion, contraception, fertility treatment and miscarriage care. Ohio has a six-week abortion ban on the books that is not currently in effect because of a legal challenge, but that could take effect if the state Supreme Court allows it. Efforts are underway to have similar measures on ballots in Arizona, Florida and Nevada next year. A spokeswoman for Think Big America said the group was providing “financial and strategic support” to the campaigns in Ohio, Arizona and Nevada, including putting members on advisory boards, helping to develop messaging and analyzing polls. She added that it was also prepared to help with direct voter contact and, if applicable, legal challenges. The creation of the organization was first reported by The 19th and The Chicago Sun-Times. Mr. Pritzker is widely seen as a future presidential candidate, and — like another possible White House contender, Gov. Gavin Newsom of California — has advertised his state as an oasis from Republican policies and an emblem of Democratic governance. In a video on Wednesday, Mr. Pritzker condemned abortion bans, but also singled out Republican efforts to restrict voting and to ban some books discussing race and gender from school curriculums and libraries — suggesting that his organization could eventually focus on those issues, too. “Over the last few years, the far-right agenda has only become more extreme,” he said. “The end of reproductive rights, widespread book bans, a rollback of voting rights and civil rights, the erosion of trust in our institutions — that will be our permanent reality if we don’t act now.”






Article: 21
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: A New Goal for Abortion Bills: Punish or Protect Doctors
Author: David W. Chen
Publication_Date: Feb. 16, 2023
Article_Content: A flurry of more than 300 abortion-related bills — a majority of which seek restrictions — have been filed around the country since January, according to health care groups and activists. The legislative calendar is packed with 300 abortion bills. “You can’t go to jail for screwing up an appendectomy,” one lawmaker said. For the first time since the fight over abortion access was kicked to the states after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, newly elected legislatures around the country are coming into session and are putting the polarizing issue at the top of their agendas. Around 300 bills in 40 states have been proposed so far — with a majority seeking to restrict access to abortion, and others trying to strengthen it. Most of the bills are in the early stages, and many are not likely to survive politically divided state governments to make it into law. But if there is one thing that is evident, the legislative flurry shows that both sides of the debate agree on at least one point: Doctors are the critical link — and that has made them the most vulnerable to punishment. At least three dozen bills are aimed at doctors and other medical personnel as a way to regulate abortion. In a bill in Wyoming, doctors and nurses who perform abortions or prescribe medication for abortions could face five years in prison. In Nebraska, where abortion is currently legal until 22 weeks after a woman’s last menstrual period, a bill to make it illegal after around six weeks would strip doctors who perform abortions of their medical licenses if they perform one after detecting cardiac activity on an ultrasound, or even if they fail to provide an ultrasound before an abortion. “Our goal isn’t to throw a lot of doctors in jail; our goal is accountability,” said Sue Liebel, the director of state affairs for Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, an anti-abortion group that lobbies for restrictions and bans. More than a dozen states already ban most abortions, and those laws punish doctors with prison and steep fines. That tactic has largely worked: Abortion providers have shut down in states with bans, and doctors and hospitals are reluctant to provide abortions until women are sick enough to qualify for exceptions that say the procedure is legal when a woman’s life is in danger. In states with bans, abortion pills have become a crucial workaround. Although bans prohibit abortion by any method, including medication, pills are tougher to regulate. Before Roe was overturned, medication was already used in more than half of all abortions in the United States. Pills and their providers are increasingly becoming targets of attempts to restrict abortion. A suit filed by anti-abortion groups in federal court in Texas is seeking to overturn federal approval of a key abortion drug. In Iowa, where abortion is currently legal until 22 weeks after a woman’s last menstrual period, a new bill would make it a felony for doctors or anyone else to distribute abortion pills, punishable by up to 10 years in jail. The bill would not penalize women who take or obtain the pills. A woman in a white lab coat stands and looks straight ahead. Dr. Jamila Perritt, an obstetrician-gynecologist and the president of Physicians for Reproductive Health, which favors abortion rights, said the surge of new legislation should be “a rallying call” for doctors who had not been previously engaged. Abortion rights advocates are guardedly optimistic that several states with Democratic legislatures will preserve or strengthen executive orders signed by current or previous governors, making it harder for future elected officials to change the law if political dynamics change. In Hawaii, one bill would allow physician assistants to perform abortions. Another would shield doctors and patients from out-of-state subpoenas relating to reproductive health and preclude doctors who perform abortions from losing their medical licenses — not unlike one that was recently signed into law in Illinois, and another that was introduced in Vermont.  In New Hampshire, where abortion is legal until 24 weeks, doctors who perform them beyond that time may no longer be subject to prison sentences, under newly proposed legislation. Nine abortion-related bills have been filed, according to New Hampshire Right to Life, which opposes abortion. One bill would ban abortions if cardiac activity is detected, which is usually around six weeks. Another would require medical professionals to provide written instructions and warnings about abortion medication and mandate the right to view ultrasound images. Another bill, sponsored by Representative Daniel Wolf, a moderate Republican, would repeal the penalties against physicians who violate the existing abortion law: a prison sentence up to seven years and a fine up to $100,000. Mr. Wolf said he had heard from doctors and hospitals, already short-staffed, who worry about recruitment and retention. “You can’t go to jail for screwing up an appendectomy — that’s the thing that gets to me,” he said. “If somebody will show me where there are other types of surgeries that a doctor can do that can send you to jail, let me know.” A view from overhead of a large group of people carrying signs in a rotunda. Hundreds of people crowded the Nebraska State Capitol rotunda this month to protest a bill that would ban most abortions. Though a handful of legislatures, like Florida, have yet to kick off their sessions, a majority of new doctor-related bills seek to punish providers and are being proposed in states where some abortion limits are in effect, or are being litigated, as a way to tighten regulations. Even bills not directly aimed at doctors still feature mechanisms to hold them accountable. In Idaho, a bill that would make the transporting of minors seeking abortions a human trafficking crime stipulates that the burden is on doctors to prove in court that they didn’t break the law. As part of the “Life Is a Human Right Act” in Wyoming, performing an abortion or administering abortion medication would be considered a felony, and doctors and those with professional licenses who are implicated would lose their licenses. Women who received an abortion could sue for civil damages. Wyoming’s current ban on abortion is on hold because of a legal challenge. The new bill, which easily passed the House last week, would take effect if the existing ban is ruled unconstitutional. In a Feb. 1 hearing, the bill’s primary sponsor, Representative Rachel Rodriguez-Williams, a Republican from northwestern Wyoming, cited “the integrity of the medical profession.” In response to emailed questions seeking more details about the punitive impact on doctors, Ms. Rodriguez-Williams wrote that the bill “clearly defines what is prohibited and makes abortion as defined in the bill a crime with appropriate penalties.” She added: “I believe the abortion industry is placing profits over people, causing physical and emotional harm to women and girls facing unplanned pregnancies.” On the same day as that hearing, around 100 people testified for eight hours at a health committee hearing in Lincoln, Neb., where doctors also took center stage. A woman in a pink sweater stands and looks in the distance. “If we’re protecting the most vulnerable, then yes, you do want to punish the people or do something that has teeth in it to stop the people who are propagating it,” said Dr. Catherine J. Wheeler, a retired physician in Colorado who is a member of the American Association of Pro-Life Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Under the Nebraska Heartbeat Act, abortion would be banned when any fetal cardiac activity is detected. The bill would revoke the license of any doctor who performed an abortion, with exceptions for rape, incest or if the pregnant woman is in danger of dying. But during the hearing, opponents said that legislators were potentially opening doctors up to criminal charges. “I do not need you to believe abortion is OK — what I need from you all is to allow me to be a doctor,” said Dr. Abigail Delaney, a reproductive endocrinologist. “I need you to get out of our exam room. I need you to allow me to shoulder the ethical burdens of the profession I chose.” The committee adjourned without taking a vote. To Dr. Catherine J. Wheeler, a retired physician in Colorado who used to perform abortions, but is now opposed to them, these measures are overdue. “If we’re protecting the most vulnerable, then yes, you do want to punish the people or do something that has teeth in it to stop the people who are propagating it,” said Dr. Wheeler, who is a member of the American Association of Pro-Life Obstetricians and Gynecologists. But Molly A. Meegan, the chief legal officer and general counsel of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, which opposes any “criminal penalties, lawsuits, fines or other punishments for providing the full spectrum of evidence-based care,” said that doctors, who are already under incredible duress, were caught in the middle. “They are becoming a punching bag for legislators trying to make a political point,” she said. Blurred images of medical personnel in blue scrubs walking down a hallway. The majority of new doctor-related bills seek to punish abortion providers and are being proposed in states where some abortion limits are in effect, or being litigated, as a way to tighten regulation. The Interstate Medical Licensure Compact, which coordinates and streamlines the process by which physicians can be licensed in multiple states, has taken a neutral stance on abortion legislation. But it did change its rules in November after being prompted by increased concerns from doctors. Previously, a physician whose license in one state was revoked or suspended would automatically face the same penalty for 90 days in the nearly 40 states that have joined the compact. But now if a physician is licensed in, say, two states and one of them takes away the physician’s license solely because of abortion, the other state does not have to abide by that suspension order. “It’s up to each state how they should govern how medicine is practiced in their state,” said Marschall Smith, the commission’s executive director. In Montana, where abortions are legal up to viability, usually around 23 weeks, the House approved a bill last week requiring doctors to agree in writing to participate in abortion procedures. Referred to as a medical conscience bill, the legislation also gives medical institutions and health care providers the right to decline abortions based on ethical or religious beliefs. Dr. Jamila Perritt, an obstetrician-gynecologist and the president of Physicians for Reproductive Health, which supports abortion rights, said the surge of new legislation should be “a rallying call” for doctors who had not been previously engaged. “There is no state — there is no place — that is safe,” she said. “Everything is at risk right now.”




Article: 22
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Iowa Judge Temporarily Suspends New Abortion Ban
Author: Colbi Edmonds
Publication_Date: July 17, 2023
Article_Content: Judge Joseph Seidlin put a hold on the law, which prohibits abortion after six weeks of pregnancy, days after the governor signed it. Supporters of abortion rights gathered last week to protest at the Iowa State Capitol in Des Moines, during a special legislative session to pass an abortion ban. On Friday, Iowa’s Republican governor signed a strict new abortion ban into law. And for three days, most abortions in Iowa were illegal past six weeks of pregnancy. Until Monday afternoon, when a district judge put the ban on hold. Joseph Seidlin, a district court judge in Polk County, said that the new ban would be suspended  while the larger legal case against it moved forward. He said in his ruling that the plaintiffs who filed a lawsuit against the ban, including the American Civil Liberties Union, Planned Parenthood and other abortion providers, were likely to succeed on the merits of their case. That means that abortion in Iowa is once again legal up to around 22 weeks of pregnancy, at least for now. “We are deeply relieved that the court granted this relief so essential health care in Iowa can continue,’’ said Dr. Abbey Hardy-Fairbanks, medical director of the Emma Goldman Clinic, one of the plaintiffs. “We are also acutely aware that the relief is only pending further litigation and the future of abortion in Iowa remains tenuous and threatened.” The legal whiplash is the latest turn in the conservative state’s yearslong struggle to restrict the procedure. At least a dozen Republican states have banned or severely restricted abortion since the United States Supreme Court ruled last year that it was not protected in the Constitution. in 2018, Iowa legislators passed a six-week ban that was challenged in court, and could not be enforced when the State Supreme Court deadlocked over it in June. The governor, Kim Reynolds, called a special session to pass another ban, which the Legislature did this month. “The abortion industry’s attempt to thwart the will of Iowans and the voices of their elected representatives continues today, but I will fight this all the way to the Iowa Supreme Court where we expect a decision that will finally provide justice for the unborn,” Governor Reynolds said on Monday. In his ruling, Judge Seidlin said that he chose to preserve the status quo set by the Iowa Supreme Court when it deadlocked on the previous ban, and called the new bill “virtually identical” to the one passed in 2018. “There are good, honorable and intelligent people — morally, politically and legally — on both sides of this upsetting societal and constitutional dilemma,” he wrote in his ruling. Iowa Democrats said the decision, though not the final word on the case, was a win. “Iowans support and deserve their fundamental right to make health care decisions about their own bodies,” said Representative Jennifer Konfrst, the Democratic minority leader of the House. The measure passed last week by Republicans allows for abortions until there is a “detectable fetal heartbeat” — a term that medical groups dispute because the embryo does not have a fully formed heart at that stage. Rather, there is cardiac cellular activity, which generally occurs at roughly six weeks into pregnancy, before many women even realize they are pregnant. Iowa providers and abortion-rights advocates filed suit within hours of the Legislature’s passage, saying it was unconstitutional under the standard of “undue burden.” The legislation includes exceptions after that point in cases of rape or incest, when the woman’s life is in serious danger or she faces a risk of certain permanent injuries, or when fetal abnormalities “incompatible with life” are present.




Article: 23
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Ohio Vote Shows Abortion’s Potency to Reshape Elections
Author: Lisa Lerer
Publication_Date: Aug. 9, 2023
Article_Content: The Dobbs ruling has turned a coalition of liberal, swing and moderate Republican voters into a political force. Even in August in Ohio. A voter at a polling location in the suburbs of Cincinnati, Ohio, on Tuesday. Voters in the state rejected a bid on Tuesday to make it harder to amend the State Constitution. Gov. Mike DeWine of Ohio, a Republican, argued that Tuesday’s vote over how to amend the State Constitution was about protecting the state from a flood of special interest money. Secretary of State Frank LaRose, another Republican, urged voters to protect the “very foundational rules” of their constitution. But Ohio voters clearly didn’t buy it. About three million of them showed up for a vote dominated by the debate over abortion rights — an issue that was not technically on the ballot, but was the undeniable force that transformed what would have normally been a little-noticed election over an arcane legislative proposal into a national event. For decades, a majority of Americans supported some form of legalized abortion. But the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision overturning Roe v. Wade has shifted the political intensity on the issue, reshaping a once mostly silent coalition of liberal, swing and moderate Republican voters into a political force. It’s a force Democrats are working hard to harness in elections across the country next year, often with ballot measures, and it’s a power Republicans have yet to figure out how to match, or at least manage. “We’ve taken it on the chin since Dobbs,” said Michael Gonidakis, president of Ohio Right to Life in Columbus, Ohio, who helped organize efforts supporting the proposal on Tuesday. “One of the things we learned was to get out in front and get out ahead and don’t wait because you’ll be run over by the train.” Officially, Ohio voters were being asked whether to make it harder to amend the State Constitution by raising the threshold to enact a new constitutional amendment from a simple majority to 60 percent and increase the requirements to get such initiatives on the ballot. In remarks before party activists and in strategy memos, Republican officials acknowledged that the measure was an attempt to make it harder for abortion rights supporters to pass a ballot measure scheduled for November that would add an amendment protecting abortion rights to the State Constitution. Those private comments fueled a firestorm of national media coverage, nearly $20 million in political spending and surprisingly high turnout for an election in the dead of summer. More on Abortion Issues in America Texas Lawsuit: A pregnant Texas woman whose fetus has a fatal condition sued the state seeking an emergency court order to allow her doctor to perform an abortion, despite the state’s strict bans on the procedure.
On the Ballot: After voters in Ohio approved a measure to enshrine abortion rights in the State Constitution, could Florida be next? Crossing the Border: American women are traveling to Mexico for abortions, crystallizing the shifting policies of two nations that once held vastly different positions on the procedure. A Key Court Ruling: Georgia’s Supreme Court upheld the state’s six-week abortion ban, rejecting arguments that the law was unconstitutional when the state legislature approved it in 2019.
Nearly twice as many people voted on the Ohio measure than cast ballots in primaries for governor, Senate, House and other marquee statewide races last year. The power of abortion to mobilize a majority coalition has armed Democrats with a potent new political tool, particularly in crucial battlegrounds like Michigan, Ohio and Arizona where Republican legislatures moved quickly to restrict abortion rights. Already, Democrats are looking ahead to 2024, with activists in around 10 states considering efforts to put abortion protections in state constitutions. If they succeed, those efforts could help boost Democratic turnout in key states — including Arizona, both a presidential battleground and home to a key Senate race next year, and Florida, a traditional swing state that has slipped away from the party in recent elections. The Ohio defeat was powered by a strong showing from Democratic and swing voters. Opponents overperformed in some critical suburban battleground counties. In Athens, for example, a Democratic bastion and the home of Ohio University, voters opposed the measure by 71 percent. Last fall, former Representative Tim Ryan, the Democratic candidate who lost a Senate race to J.D. Vance, a Republican, won the county by 61 percent. Why is this story labeled ‘News Analysis’? In this format, reporters with deep experience in the subject draw on their expertise to help you better understand an event. They step back from the breaking news to evaluate its significance and possible ramifications, but they may not inject their personal opinions. But there were also signs that moderate, and even some conservative voters, were against the idea. In November, 66 percent of voters in Defiance County, a conservative area in the northwest corner of the state, backed Mr. Vance. Only 61 percent supported the proposal to amend the state constitution. “We’ve never seen this amount of spending or attention on an issue related to ballot measure processes and I can tell you it’s not because everyone inherently cares about what the rules are on ballot issues,” said Kelly Hall, executive director of the Fairness Project, which has helped run nearly three dozen ballot measures. “The attention from both sides can only be attributed to the implications for the abortion issue.” A man in a white No. 9 Bengals jersey holds a sign urging people to vote no on the referendum. Andy Brown, 31, stood outside for hours waving to voters in Cincinnati, Ohio, on Tuesday. “It’s a crucial election — a lot is on the line this year,” he said. After spending nearly a half century pushing against Roe, Republicans have struggled to adapt, trapped between a party base that still largely opposes abortion rights and a country that broadly supports them. Abortion played a significant role in motivating key parts of the Democratic base to the polls during the midterm elections. Abortion-related initiatives won in all six states where they appeared on the ballot in 2022 and likely helped to boost turnout for the Democratic ticket in those places. In red and purple states — Michigan, Kentucky and Kansas — the vote for abortion rights was between 52 percent and 59 percent — just below the 60 percent threshold Ohio Republicans were trying to set. This year, Democrats prevailed in a contest for the Wisconsin Supreme Court where their candidate focused on her support for abortion rights in a state with a law banning the procedure. Abortion is legal in Ohio until 22 weeks of pregnancy. After the Supreme Court decision, a law banning abortion at six weeks took effect but was blocked by a state judge while litigation proceeded — which it still is. With Tuesday’s referendum, Republican lawmakers attempted a version of the kind of two-track strategy their party had done successfully for years. To conservative voters, they emphasized the measure’s role in raising the bar for the abortion amendment while, to other audiences, they talked about other potential impacts. For Republicans, the challenge is that most of their voters are out-of-step with the broader electorate. Polling conducted last month by The New York Times/Siena College found that 61 percent of voters believe abortion should be all or mostly legal, a view shared by majorities in every region of the country, across all income levels, ages, racial groups and of both men and women. But 57 percent of Republicans believe the procedure should be all or mostly illegal. On the presidential primary campaign trail, Republican candidates have largely tried to avoid spending too much time on the specifics of the issue. Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida signed legislation prohibiting most abortions after six weeks in his home state, but has stopped short of embracing a federal ban. Others, including Senator Tim Scott, back a 15-week federal ban. And former President Donald J. Trump, who takes credit for appointing three of the Supreme Court Justices who voted to overturn Roe, has not endorsed any kind of restrictions. He’s expressed concerns that moving too far to the right on abortion could cost Republicans votes, saying it could make it “very, very hard to win an election.” But Republicans are unlikely to evade the topic in the general election. In a post-Roe world, where protecting abortion rights has become a priority for a larger swath of voters, the old strategies don’t work quite as well. Katie Paris, the founder of Red, Wine and Blue, a group that organizes suburban women voters for Ohio Democrats, said she saw voters who wouldn’t normally have tuned into a summer election on an obscure political process get engaged. Abortion, she said, snaps them to attention. “There’s constant evidence of how personal this is,” she said. “It’s the perfect case study.”





Article: 24
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Indiana Supreme Court Upholds Abortion Ban
Author: Kate Zernike
Publication_Date: June 30, 2023
Article_Content: The court said the state Constitution provides a limited right to abortion, but not a “fundamental” one. Indiana was the first state to pass an abortion ban after the Supreme Court’s ruling striking down Roe v. Wade. A ruling by Indiana’s highest court on Friday cleared the way for a ban in the state on most abortions from conception. The court said that the state Constitution guarantees a limited right to abortion, but not a fundamental one — that means allowing abortion only when it is necessary to save a woman’s life or protect her from a serious health risk. The court’s decision removes the temporary injunction on a near-total ban on abortion that the state’s Republican-controlled legislature passed last August, after the United States Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade and the right to abortion under the U.S. Constitution. The Indiana case resembles those in other states, where abortion-rights groups have challenged bans passed after Roe’s reversal by arguing that varying provisions in state constitutions protect a right to abortion. On Friday, a federal judge ruled that the bulk of a North Carolina abortion ban after 12 weeks of pregnancy could move forward. More on Abortion Issues in America Texas Lawsuit: A pregnant Texas woman whose fetus has a fatal condition sued the state seeking an emergency court order to allow her doctor to perform an abortion, despite the state’s strict bans on the procedure. On the Ballot: After voters in Ohio approved a measure to enshrine abortion rights in the State Constitution, could Florida be next? Crossing the Border: American women are traveling to Mexico for abortions, crystallizing the shifting policies of two nations that once held vastly different positions on the procedure.
A Key Court Ruling: Georgia’s Supreme Court upheld the state’s six-week abortion ban, rejecting arguments that the law was unconstitutional when the state legislature approved it in 2019. The Indiana high court said that it was trying to resolve what its opinion called the conflict between “two irreconcilable interests”: a woman’s decision to end a pregnancy, and the state’s desire to protect potential life. By saying there was a limited but not a “fundamental” right to abortion, the justices left open a door for future lawsuits, but only in cases where a woman’s life or health was at risk: “The General Assembly otherwise retains broad legislative discretion for determining whether and the extent to which to prohibit abortion.” “We celebrate this day — one long in coming, but morally justified,” the state’s Republican Attorney General, Todd Rokita, said in a statement. The coalition of providers and abortion-rights groups that had brought the suit, which included Planned Parenthood and the American Civil Liberties Union, said it was “devastated” by the ruling, arguing that it would deny “essential health care” to 1.5 million people in Indiana, and especially the poor and others who already face hurdles seeking medical care. “Now, patients will be forced either to flee the state to access abortion if they have the means, seek abortion outside of the health care system, or carry pregnancies against their will with profound medical risk and life-altering consequences,” the plaintiffs said. Indiana was the first state to pass a ban after the Supreme Court’s ruling striking down Roe. The emotional two-week legislative debate over the measure displayed the divisions — in Indiana and other states — among even Republicans who oppose abortion rights. Some argued that the measure went too far, while others objected that it allowed too many exceptions. The law bans abortion except in cases of rape or incest, as long as the procedure is not done more than 10 weeks after fertilization; cases of fatal fetal anomalies; and when the mother faces risk of death. It also requires abortions to be done in certain hospitals, eliminating the licenses for clinics that specialize in the procedure. Doctors who perform illegal abortions face up to $10,000 in fines and six years in prison.   Abortion-rights groups had argued that abortion was protected in the first section of the state Constitution, which endows its citizens with “certain inalienable rights” among them “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.” As long as the ban was blocked, abortion remained legal in the state until 22 weeks of pregnancy, making Indiana critical to abortion access for women in nearby states that enacted near-total bans. The state became the center of the abortion debate last summer after a 10-year-old rape victim from Ohio, where abortion was banned, sought an abortion in Indiana. The Indiana ban is scheduled to take effect on Aug. 1, but the court’s decision left a small opening: A separate lawsuit argues that the ban violates a religious freedom act passed in 2015, because some religions permit abortion. A judge in that case put a temporary injunction on the ban in December, and the case is to be heard in September. Until then, those who say that the abortion ban violates their religious liberty can still seek abortions. The four out of five justices who agreed on Friday to allow the ban to take effect said, essentially, that the Indiana legislature had the right to ban abortion because it had a long tradition of doing so. That tradition was interrupted only “under protest” in 1973 when Roe v. Wade established that states could not ban abortion until the third trimester, and then only in limited circumstances. “Our laws have long reflected that Hoosiers, through their elected representatives, may collectively conclude that legal protections inherent in personhood commence before birth,” the opinion said, referring to Indiana residents, “so the state’s broad authority to protect the public’s health, welfare and safety extends to protecting prenatal life.” One justice, Christopher M. Goff, disagreed that the state Constitution did not protect a more fundamental right to abortion, saying that within its “bundle of liberty rights” was “the fundamental ‘right to be let alone.’” He wrote that “many of the liberties Hoosiers take for granted — the right to vote, to travel, to marry, to educate one’s children as one sees fit, or to refuse medical treatment — stand on federal precedents that are also now vulnerable to reversal.” In his dissent, Justice Goff argued that Indiana residents should be allowed to vote on whether they want abortion to be legal, and urged the legislature to put the question on a ballot measure. A Public Religion Research Institute poll in December found that 61 percent of Indiana residents believed abortion should be legal in all or most cases, and 10 percent believed it should be illegal in all cases, which is in line with public opinion nationwide.







Article: 25
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Mother Who Gave Abortion Pills to Teen Daughter Gets 2 Years in Prison
Author: Jesus Jiménez
Publication_Date: Sept. 22, 2023
Article_Content: Jessica Burgess had pleaded guilty to violating Nebraska’s abortion law. Her daughter, who was 17 when she ended her late-term pregnancy last year, was sentenced in July to 90 days in jail. Protesters gathered at the Nebraska Capitol in Lincoln in May as the Legislature approved a 12-week abortion ban. A Nebraska woman who acquired abortion pills that her teenage daughter used to end her pregnancy last year was sentenced on Friday to two years in prison. The woman, Jessica Burgess, 42, was charged after the police found her private Facebook messages, which revealed plans she had with her daughter to end the pregnancy and “burn the evidence.” Prosecutors said that Ms. Burgess ordered the pills online and gave them to her daughter, Celeste Burgess, in April 2022, when her daughter was 17 and in the third trimester of her pregnancy. The Burgesses later buried the fetal remains, the authorities said. Ms. Burgess pleaded guilty in July to violating Nebraska’s abortion law, furnishing false information to a law enforcement officer and removing or concealing human skeletal remains. Celeste Burgess was sentenced in July to 90 days in jail and two years of probation after she pleaded guilty in May to removing or concealing human skeletal remains. Jessica Burgess, who faced up to five years in prison, was sentenced to two years, with her terms for false reporting and removal of skeletal remains running concurrently. Brad Ewalt, a lawyer for Ms. Burgess, asked Judge Mark A. Johnson of Madison County District Court on Friday to sentence his client to probation. The judge denied the request, saying that Ms. Burgess had treated the fetal remains “like yesterday’s trash,” The Norfolk Daily News reported. Celeste Burgess, who was released from jail on Sept. 11, sat near the back of the courtroom on Friday and wiped tears from her face when her mother was sentenced, The Daily News reported. Mr. Ewalt and the Madison County prosecutor who tried the case did not immediately respond to requests for comment on Friday. A police investigation into the Burgesses began before the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June 2022. The case has fueled fears that people who end their pregnancies in the post-Roe era, and those who help them, could be prosecuted for having abortions and that their private communications could be used as evidence against them. The investigation began in late April 2022, when the police in Norfolk, Neb., began looking into whether a 17-year-old girl had given birth prematurely to a stillborn baby, and whether the girl and her mother had buried it, according to court documents. At the time, abortion was banned in Nebraska after 20 weeks from conception. This May, Gov. Jim Pillen, a Republican, signed a 12-week ban into law. The Burgesses were initially charged with concealing a stillbirth. But according to court documents, a detective later asked Celeste Burgess for the exact date her pregnancy ended. When she said she needed to check her Facebook messages to remember, the detective obtained a warrant for messages she had exchanged with her mother. Meta, the parent company of Facebook, complied with the warrant. The detective found evidence of a medically induced abortion, according to court documents, allowing the authorities to file additional charges.








Article: 26
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: North Carolina Legislature Reapproves Abortion Ban, Overriding Governor’s Veto
Author: Kate Kelly
Publication_Date: May 16, 2023
Article_Content: Republicans used their supermajority to uphold a 12-week ban, overruling the Democratic governor’s attempt to stop the bill and preserve wider abortion access. Just days after the governor vetoed the bill, the Republican-dominated legislature reapproved it. Crowds in the House gallery chanted, “Shame!” North Carolina’s Republican-dominated legislature upheld a bill Tuesday night that will ban most abortions after 12 weeks, overriding the Democratic governor’s recent veto of the new restrictions. The success of the override was a victory for Republicans and a critical test of their new, but slim, supermajority. The vote, taken in both chambers in back-to-back sessions, means a dramatic change for abortion access in North Carolina, where abortion is currently legal up to 20 weeks. The vote also restricts access for women across the South, some of whom have traveled to North Carolina for abortions from states where the procedure is largely banned. The new law is set to take effect July 1. The vote came just days after Gov. Roy Cooper vetoed the bill at a raucous rally near the legislative building in Raleigh, and after a public campaign to pressure Republican lawmakers to vote against the ban. Given the Republican supermajority in both chambers of the state legislature, the override was not entirely a surprise. But it was also not assured. Just one vote could have tipped the outcome. The Senate voted in favor of the override, and the House took up the bill about an hour later. Immediately after the House had voted to approve the ban, around 8:30 p.m., crowds of onlookers in the chamber’s gallery chanted: “Shame! Shame! Shame!” In a statement minutes after the override vote’s conclusion, House Speaker Tim Moore said, “I am proud that the House has overridden the governor’s veto of this meaningful, mainstream legislation.”  The ban, known as Senate Bill 20, would restrict most abortions in North Carolina to 12 weeks, with exceptions for rape, incest, certain fetal abnormalities and the life of the mother. The ban also mandates that detailed information about abortion procedures be reported to state health regulators and institutes longer waiting periods and more in-person medical visits to obtain an abortion. “North Carolinians now understand that Republicans are unified in their assault on women’s reproductive freedom, and we are energized to fight back on this and other critical issues facing our state,” Mr. Cooper said after the override. “I will continue doing everything I can to protect abortion access in North Carolina, because women’s lives depend on it.” North Carolina’s 12-week ban is less restrictive than other state laws that prohibit the procedure beginning at conception or after six weeks of pregnancy. Republicans said the bill was a compromise that would protect innocent life and support women, but abortion-rights activists said it would prevent women across the South from gaining access to abortion and would put lives at risk. A recent poll shows that most voters support the state’s current abortion access, which allows the procedure up to 20 weeks, or want to see it expanded. A little over a third of voters want to further restrict or ban access. ImageGov. Roy Cooper, in a white shirt and a blue tie, stands behind a lectern with a sign reading, “Stop the bans.” Crowds of abortion rights advocates gathered in Raleigh, N.C., on Saturday as Mr. Cooper vetoed a bill that would ban abortion after 12 weeks. The override was a huge blow to Mr. Cooper and his political allies, who had asked North Carolina voters to contact their legislators and urge them not to override the veto, zeroing in on four Republicans from districts with substantial numbers of Democratic constituents in the hope that he could persuade to vote against the party line. One of those lawmakers was Tricia Cotham, a longtime Democrat who, in a surprise move, switched parties last month, handing Republicans supermajorities in both chambers of the state legislature. Ms. Cotham had earlier this year backed a bill that would have legalized abortion until viability, considered about 22 or 23 weeks. But in May, she voted in favor of the 12-week ban, and she did so again during the override vote on Tuesday night. “I believe this bill strikes a reasonable balance on the abortion issue and represents a middle ground that anyone not holding one of the two extremist positions can support,” Ms Cotham said in a statement after the vote. Republicans have struggled to find consensus on abortion bans since the Supreme Court last year kicked regulation back to the states when it overturned Roe v. Wade. In South Carolina, the G.O.P. has been unable to reach agreement and pass a new abortion ban for months because of objections from within the party. Nebraska is considering a 12-week ban after its attempt to pass a six-week ban failed. Abortion opponents have pushed for stricter bans, but they celebrated the North Carolina override as a victory. “The battleground state of North Carolina has taken a major step forward in the fight for life,” said Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America. Republican strategists said the ban could prove to be an important litmus test of the political realities for Republicans, especially in purple states like North Carolina. “Legislatively, they’re on offense, but politically, they’re on defense, which is a bizarre place to be,” said Doug Heye, a former Republican National Committee communications director and a North Carolina native who has consulted on three Republican U.S. Senate campaigns in the state. “They’re feeling this issue out for what’s acceptable to the broader public.” Dr. Kristin Baker, a House Republican, was the final legislator to speak before the vote. The bill “balances protecting the life of the unborn child,” she said, over boos from the gallery, adding: “It balances that with a woman’s need for life saving care. And, importantly, it protects the integrity of the doctor-patient relationship.” On Monday, entities that do business throughout North Carolina, including the online-rating company Yelp, the British manufacturer Lush Cosmetics and the upscale Raleigh eatery Death & Taxes, signed a petition opposing the bill, arguing that it could damage North Carolina’s standing as a magnet for business. Restricting access to services including abortion “will not only deter future businesses from investing in our great state; it will also jeopardize the trust of those companies who have already established roots here,” said Ashley Christensen, a chef and the proprietor of a half-dozen restaurants and food-service businesses in the Raleigh area, who signed on to the petition. Though Mr. Cooper and other Democrats vowed to keep fighting for abortion rights, it is unclear what maneuvers they might have left. During about two combined hours of debates, Democrats in the House and the Senate were by turns indignant and tearful about the bill before them. “It is honestly hard for me to believe that my government would do this to me, to my daughters, to my friends, to their daughters,” said Natasha Marcus, a Senate Democrat from the Charlotte area.







Article: 27
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Backtracks on Support for Federal Abortion Ban
Author: Maggie Astor
Publication_Date: Aug. 14, 2023
Article_Content: Mr. Kennedy, who is running for president as a Democrat, said that he would sign a ban after three months’ gestation, but his campaign quickly reversed his comments. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. is running for president as a Democrat, but some of his positions are more in line with Republicans. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. said Sunday that he supported a federal ban on abortion after the first trimester of pregnancy, then quickly backtracked — underscoring both his ideologically uncomfortable position within the Democratic primary field and the deep salience of abortion in next year’s election. Mr. Kennedy, who is running against President Biden, made his comments at the Iowa State Fair after an NBC News reporter asked whether he would sign a bill codifying the right to abortion once protected by Roe v. Wade. Democrats have rallied around such legislation since the Supreme Court overturned Roe last year, though the party does not currently have the votes in Congress to pass it. “I believe a decision to abort a child should be up to the woman during the first three months of life,” Mr. Kennedy said. In response to follow-up questions, Mr. Kennedy confirmed that he would sign federal restrictions after three months, which some Republicans have proposed and elected Democrats almost universally oppose. While the vast majority of abortions take place in that first-trimester window, Roe protected abortion rights until viability — the point when a fetus can survive outside the womb — which is around the end of the second trimester. Hours later, Mr. Kennedy’s campaign released a statement saying he had “misunderstood a question posed to him by an NBC reporter in a crowded, noisy exhibit hall at the Iowa State Fair.” “Mr. Kennedy’s position on abortion is that it is always the woman’s right to choose,” the statement said. “He does not support legislation banning abortion.” But the video of his comments and the back-and-forth that followed show Mr. Kennedy specifying the first three months of pregnancy in his own words, and the reporter asking several follow-up questions to confirm his position. “So you would cap it at 15 weeks?” the reporter asked. “Yes,” Mr. Kennedy said. “Or 21 weeks?” “Yes, three months,” he said. “So three months, you would sign a federal cap on that,” the reporter said. “Yes, I would,” Mr. Kennedy said. A spokeswoman for his campaign did not respond to questions on Monday. While there was no ambiguity in Mr. Kennedy’s declaration of support for a ban after three months, there were indications that he did not understand the timeline of pregnancy. By way of explaining his position, he said, “Once a child is viable outside the womb, I think then the state has an interest in protecting that child.” But viability, which can vary from pregnancy to pregnancy, is generally around 24 weeks, or six months. Mr. Kennedy, a scion of the storied American political family and an environmental lawyer, has become known for his anti-vaccine advocacy and his promotion of conspiracy theories. While he is running for president as a Democrat, some of his positions are more in line with Republicans.









Article: 28
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Offering Few Details, Trump Says He Knows How Republicans Should Approach Abortion
Author:  Maggie Astor
Publication_Date: Aug. 31, 2023
Article_Content: The former president suggested that Republicans needed to talk about exceptions to abortion bans but was otherwise vague about how his party should discuss the issue. During an interview this week, the conservative media personality Tudor Dixon said the former president had advised her to “talk differently about abortion” during her campaign for Michigan governor last year. Former President Donald J. Trump acknowledged this week that Republican positions on abortion were hurting the party, but offered few details after claiming he knew how to thread the needle. Mr. Trump’s remarks during an interview with Tudor Dixon, a conservative media personality who unsuccessfully ran for governor of Michigan last year, are one more sign that Republicans are struggling to adjust to a political environment in which abortion is a liability rather than a vote driver for them. After the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June 2022, the ruling created a backlash that has benefited Democrats in elections across the country. In her interview with Mr. Trump on her podcast on Wednesday, Ms. Dixon said that the former president had advised her during her campaign for governor to “talk differently about abortion.” “We could not pivot in time, and it really, you were absolutely right, sir,” Ms. Dixon told Mr. Trump. “Yep, that’s what happened to you,” Mr. Trump replied. “And that’s what happened to a lot of other people and — didn’t happen to me because, you know, there’s a way of talking about it. They’re the radicals. They’re the radicals, and you have to explain it. And I think exceptions are very important. I think you need the exceptions. You and I talked about that.” Ms. Dixon took a hard line on abortion during her campaign, expressing support for a total ban except in life-threatening emergencies. She emphasized that “health of the mother and life of the mother are two different things” — suggesting that she might not support exceptions for women whose health was at risk if their life wasn’t — and said she would not support abortion for a 14-year-old who had been raped. “I’ve talked to those people who were the child of a rape victim and the bond that those two people made, and the fact that out of that tragedy, there was healing through that baby,” she told a local Fox station last year, adding: “Those voices, the babies of rape victims that have come forward, are very powerful. When you hear their story and what the truth is behind that, it’s very hard to not stand up for those people.” Ms. Dixon lost to Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, the Democratic incumbent, by more than 10 percentage points. How, exactly, Mr. Trump wants to approach abortion is not clear. He has been loath to talk about it on the campaign trail at all, saying he would “look at” federal legislation to prohibit abortion after 15 weeks, which many of his 2024 rivals have embraced, but making no definitive commitment. And he has generally avoided venues — such as the first Republican debate, or mainstream news interviews — where he is likely to be asked tough questions about the issue. In his interview with Ms. Dixon, he emphasized exceptions to abortion bans, but candidates who back exceptions have not been spared from the electoral backlash, and voters have broadly supported abortion rights in referendums even in red states. His reference to Democrats as the real “radicals” mirrors language used by other Republican candidates, who often falsely accuse Democrats of supporting abortion “up until the moment of birth,” which is not a practice even in states without gestational limits. More than 93 percent of abortions take place in the first trimester, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and more than 99 percent in the first half.






Article: 29
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Arizona Governor Says Prosecutors Cannot Enforce Abortion Law
Author: Jack Healy
Publication_Date: June 23, 2023
Article_Content: Gov. Katie Hobbs, a Democrat, says she is doing what she can to protect abortion rights in a state with a 15-week ban on the procedure. Gov. Katie Hobbs of Arizona on Friday stripped local prosecutors of the power to criminally charge abortion providers. Gov. Katie Hobbs of Arizona on Friday stripped local prosecutors of the power to criminally charge abortion providers, a move aimed at protecting abortion rights in a narrowly divided political battleground. An executive order signed by Ms. Hobbs, a Democrat, would take authority away from elected county attorneys, a largely Republican group, and transfer it to Arizona’s attorney general, a Democrat who has vowed not to prosecute abortion providers. Abortion-rights groups applauded the governor’s move as a “promising and welcome” measure in a state with a law banning most abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy. Planned Parenthood of Arizona said the governor’s action would help ease fears and uncertainty among abortion providers in the state. Clinics have closed, reopened, curtailed services and lost staff in the uncertain legal landscape since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade a year ago. But some Republican prosecutors said they were blindsided by the governor’s move, and called it a power grab that unconstitutionally swept away their authority to prosecute crimes. Local prosecutors said they were still reviewing the order, but raised the possibility of suing to block it. More on Abortion Issues in America Texas Lawsuit: A pregnant Texas woman whose fetus has a fatal condition sued the state seeking an emergency court order to allow her doctor to perform an abortion, despite the state’s strict bans on the procedure. On the Ballot: After voters in Ohio approved a measure to enshrine abortion rights in the State Constitution, could Florida be next? Crossing the Border: American women are traveling to Mexico for abortions, crystallizing the shifting policies of two nations that once held vastly different positions on the procedure. A Key Court Ruling: Georgia’s Supreme Court upheld the state’s six-week abortion ban, rejecting arguments that the law was unconstitutional when the state legislature approved it in 2019. “Is she going to say I can’t prosecute drugs, or homicide cases?” said Kent Volkmer, the elected prosecutor in Pinal County, a fast-growing area just south of Phoenix. “For the governor to take that authority from me and say, ‘We’re going to outsource that to the big city’ — that’s highly problematic.” Rachel Mitchell, the county attorney in the Phoenix area, called the order an “outrageous” effort to undermine local prosecutors. The reaction highlighted the political divide between Arizona’s new Democratic governor and attorney general, and elected Republicans in more conservative areas. A similar dynamic has played out in Republican-led states where officials have removed powers from Democrats in blue cities, creating bitter rifts over local control in Florida, Tennessee, Wisconsin and other states. Mr. Volkmer, a Republican, said abortion cases were a low priority, and that he generally did not want to come between women and their doctors. But he said most criminal cases belonged with local prosecutors, and said the attorney general’s office was “certainly not equipped” to handle abortion-related cases. The effects of Ms. Hobbs’s move may be mostly symbolic. There have not been any abortion prosecutions in Arizona since Roe was struck down, legal experts said, and most counties in Arizona do not even have abortion clinics. The state’s abortion providers are clustered around Phoenix and Tucson. Ms. Hobbs won her campaign for governor last year in part by promising to protect abortion rights and reproductive freedom, but the state’s Republican-controlled Legislature has limited what she and other Democrats can do. Unlike the Democratic governors of Minnesota and California, who have passed new laws strengthening abortion rights in their solidly blue states, Ms. Hobbs has been mostly limited to vetoing Republican anti-abortion efforts and signing executive actions like the one on Friday. A near-total abortion ban that was passed in the 1800s still sits on the books, despite Ms. Hobbs’s promises to call a special legislative session to repeal it. Enforcement of that law has been halted by the courts, but a state law making it a felony for doctors to perform abortions after the 15th week of pregnancy is still in effect. Doctors convicted under the law could have their medical license revoked. Pregnant women are exempted under that law. Abortion providers say they are also subject to restrictions including a 24-hour waiting period and limits on prescribing abortion pills. The order signed by Ms. Hobbs on Friday also said Arizona would not help other states seeking assistance in abortion prosecutions, and would oppose efforts to extradite people to face abortion-related charges in other states. “I will not allow extreme and out of touch politicians to get in the way of the fundamental right Arizonans have to make decisions about their own bodies and futures,” Ms. Hobbs said in a statement. “I will continue to fight to expand access to safe and legal abortion in any way that I can.”










Article: 30
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Georgia Supreme Court Allows State’s Six-Week Abortion Ban to Remain in Effect
Author: By David W. Chen
Publication_Date: Oct. 24, 2023
Article_Content: A lower court is now expected to hear arguments on the broader question of whether the right to privacy in the state constitution protects a right to abortion. The Georgia Supreme Court ruling means that abortion remains illegal there after the sixth week of pregnancy. Georgia’s Supreme Court upheld the state’s prohibition of abortion Tuesday, rejecting arguments made by doctors and advocacy groups that the law was unconstitutional when the state legislature approved it in 2019, more than three years before the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. The ruling means that abortion remains banned in the state, with limited exceptions, after the sixth week of pregnancy — a point when most women have not yet even realized they are pregnant. With North Carolina now banning most abortions after 12 weeks of pregnancy, South Carolina after six weeks, and Florida doing the same, pending a legal challenge, the ruling ensures that abortion will be largely inaccessible in the Deep South, forcing women there to travel farther for care, to more distant states like Virginia or Illinois. The Georgia case is not over, because the court addressed only the question of whether the state ban should have been voided because of when it was enacted. The court sent the case back to a lower court for a trial on the separate question of whether the state constitution protects a right to privacy, and whether that right encompasses abortion. Still, the latest ruling in Georgia is a reminder that state constitutions have become key arbiters in the nation’s state-by-state abortion battles. In its 6-1 decision, with one justice disqualified and another not participating, the Georgia Supreme Court leaned heavily on the U.S. Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision, which overturned a national right to abortion, in reviewing Georgia’s law, the Living Infants and Equality Act, known as the LIFE Act. “Because Dobbs is controlling precedent on whether the United States Constitution confers a right to abortion, and because the parties and the trial court do not dispute that the LIFE Act complies with Dobbs, it follows that the LIFE Act did not violate the United States Constitution when enacted in 2019,” the state court concluded.On Tuesday morning, after the court issued its ruling, Chris Carr, the attorney general of Georgia, said in a statement, “We are pleased with the court’s decision and will continue to defend the constitutionality of Georgia’s LIFE Act.” Did you try to get an abortion in the past year? We want to hear from you.As part of our coverage of abortion access, we are looking for people to share their experiences. When the Dobbs decision revoked the federal constitutional right to abortion in 2022, it kicked the question of abortion to the states to regulate. Since then, many of them have enacted abortion bans, and many lawsuits have been filed to challenge the bans, with abortion rights lawyers arguing that the prohibitions are unconstitutional under state guarantees of privacy, health, liberty or family planning. One of the most closely watched cases involves Florida, where the state Supreme Court heard oral arguments in September challenging that state’s 15-week ban. Other states’ supreme courts that have ruled already this year have split on the issue: North Dakota and Oklahoma found that their state constitutions protected the right in some situations. But Idaho ruled that its Constitution did not protect abortion, and courts in South Carolina and Indiana upheld abortion bans passed since Dobbs. The Georgia case, which was brought by the SisterSong Women of Color Reproductive Justice Collective, focused on a doctrine of state law known as void ab initio, meaning void from the beginning. That doctrine says, in essence, that a Georgia law that violates the state or federal constitution at the time it is enacted is forever unconstitutional, said Julia Kaye, a senior staff attorney with the A.C.L.U. Reproductive Freedom Product, the lead attorney for abortion providers in the case. The plaintiffs had prevailed in November at a lower level, when Judge Robert C.I. McBurney of Fulton County Superior Court ruled that the six-week ban was enacted when “everywhere in America, including Georgia, it was unequivocally unconstitutional for governments — federal, state, or local — to ban abortions before viability.” But one week later, the state Supreme Court temporarily reinstated the six-week ban, setting the stage for Tuesday’s ruling. During oral arguments in March, the justices had seemed receptive to the arguments made by Stephen Petrany, the state’s solicitor general, that the Dobbs decision applied retroactively and that Roe v. Wade was incorrect all along. By contrast, the Georgia justices had seemed skeptical of the arguments made by Julia Blackburn Stone, a lawyer for the plaintiffs. "Dobbs expressly says the prior precedent was wrong,” said Justice Charles J. Bethel. In a statement underscoring the political impact of the issue, Julia Chavez Rodriguez, the campaign manager for the Biden-Harris re-election campaign, noted calls by some Republicans for a national abortion ban and said, “The stakes couldn’t be higher: This election could determine whether every woman in America faces the same terrifying reality Georgians will now face.” Marjorie Dannenfelser, the president of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, congratulated and thanked Gov. Brian Kemp of Georgia and other allies who pushed for the six-week ban. She said in a statement that 25 states now “have pro-life protections in their law in the new Dobbs era.” “When you lead and stand boldly for life, Americans will stand with you,” she said.









Article: 31
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: 4 Takeaways From Ohio’s Vote on Abortion and Democratic Power
Author: Maggie Astor
Publication_Date: Aug. 9, 2023
Article_Content: Abortion rights continue to drive turnout, and Republicans are struggling to figure out a response. Ohio voters turned out on Tuesday in much larger numbers than in previous August elections to reject a ballot measure that would have made it more difficult to protect abortion rights in a November vote. Ohio voters rejected a ballot measure on Tuesday that would have required a 60 percent supermajority to amend the State Constitution, a proposal designed by Republicans to prevent voters from preserving abortion rights through a constitutional amendment in November. Here are four takeaways from the vote. Abortion rights is a turnout engine … If anyone doubted the message that voters have been sending in election after election since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade last year, Ohioans underscored it once more on Tuesday: Voters are highly motivated by abortion. They have repeatedly supported abortion rights even in red states, and have turned out to say so even on typically low-turnout primary dates. That was clear in Kansas a year ago, when voters in a highly Republican state overwhelmingly rejected a constitutional amendment that would have allowed legislators to ban abortion. It was clear in November, when abortion-related questions were on the ballot in five states with different political leanings, and all five states voted in favor of abortion rights. It was clear this April, when a majority of voters in closely divided Wisconsin elected a liberal Supreme Court justice who had run on her support for abortion rights. And now it is clear in Ohio, where voters turned out in much larger numbers than is normal in an August election, and voted against the amendment by 14 percentage points in a state that voted for Donald J. Trump in 2020 by about eight points. On a legislative level, abortion opponents continue to have the upper hand, passing near-total bans in many states. But electorally, the Dobbs v. Jackson ruling, which overturned Roe, has changed the game. Opponents of abortion, who previously drove turnout for Republicans, are no longer doing so reliably. Supporters of abortion rights — many of whom were previously complacent, thinking Roe would never fall — are now energized. And people in the middle, seeing the real-world results of what was once theoretical, are supporting abortion more in surveys and weighing it more heavily in their voting decisions. … and Republicans are struggling to adjust. Republicans are very aware of how much the politics of abortion have changed. But they haven’t figured out how to deal with it. It is obvious that by continuing to pursue bans or major restrictions on abortion, they are motivating Democrats to vote and turning off swing voters. But deciding not to pursue those restrictions anymore would anger many of their own supporters. After all, Republicans have long relied on voters for whom banning abortion is a top priority — conservative evangelicals, for instance — for exactly the sort of enthusiastic base turnout that Democrats are now enjoying. This dilemma is playing out in the Republican presidential primary. Some candidates — including Mr. Trump and his highest-polling challenger, Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida — have made gestures, albeit inconsistent ones, toward leaving the issue of abortion to the states to decide. That has drawn the ire of powerful anti-abortion groups like Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, which has said it will not support any candidate who doesn’t endorse, at a minimum, a federal ban after 15 weeks’ gestation. Other candidates, like Senator Tim Scott and former Gov. Nikki Haley of South Carolina, have said they would sign a 15-week ban but have tried to avoid talking about it much. Only former Vice President Mike Pence has made abortion a focus of his campaign.  Democracy arguments are potent. Voters showed that they support direct expressions of their democratic power, even if they would not normally support Democratic candidates or causes. Republicans in Ohio presented the proposed constitutional amendment as a way to protect Ohio’s laws from the influence of wealthy out-of-state donors and interest groups. But those arguments didn’t prevail. In large numbers, voters understood the proposal to be specifically about making it harder to pass an abortion-rights amendment in November, not broadly about improving the amendment process. They saw it as “underhanded,” in the words of one voter — an effort to achieve one thing under the guise of another. Some of them also disliked the fact that Republican legislators had put the measure on the ballot in August, a summer vacation month when turnout is usually very low — especially given that some of the same legislators had just passed a law to ban most August special elections for exactly that reason. Broadly, voters are responding when they believe their own voting power is under threat. These sorts of objections were part of the same pattern as voters’ rejection of candidates in the midterms who denied the results of the 2020 election. Ballot measures will remain important. With Roe v. Wade overturned and Democrats in a divided Congress unable to restore its protections nationally, referendums and constitutional amendments are one of the few mechanisms available to supporters of abortion rights in red states. And they are taking advantage. Not every state allows ballot measures. But already, in just over a year since the Dobbs ruling, voters have used them to express support for abortion rights in three Republican-led states: Kansas, Kentucky and Montana. A fourth will be on the ballot in Ohio in November, and because of Tuesday’s results, it will require only a simple majority to pass. Several other states that have significant abortion restrictions, or could soon, allow citizen-sponsored ballot initiatives and therefore present potential targets for supporters of abortion rights. Supporters in Florida are likely to place a referendum on the ballot in 2024; it would require 60 percent of the vote to pass. Arizona and Missouri could have similar proposals, but they are not certain. Those three states alone are home to more than 10 percent of the country’s population.






Article: 32
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: North Dakota Governor Signs Near-Total Abortion Ban
Author: Ava Sasani
Publication_Date: April 24, 2023
Article_Content: The governor approved the state’s prohibition on Monday, just a month after the State Supreme Court blocked an earlier ban. Gov. Doug Burgum, center, signed a new abortion ban into law on Monday. North Dakota became the latest state on Monday to enact a near-total ban on abortion, just one month after the State Supreme Court temporarily blocked a similar ban from taking effect. Under the new law, an abortion in the case of rape or incest would be permissible only in the first six weeks of pregnancy, a time when most women have not yet realized they are pregnant. Abortion is permitted without gestational limits if terminating a pregnancy can “prevent the death or a serious health risk” of the mother. Gov. Doug Burgum, a Republican, signed the bill into law on Monday. The law, Mr. Burgum said, “reaffirms North Dakota as a pro-life state.” The governor added that it also “clarifies and refines” the existing state ban that has been blocked by courts. The new law, which takes immediate effect, is a dramatic shift for the state, where abortions had been legal up until 22 weeks of pregnancy. Under the earlier ban, providers who performed an abortion to save the life of a mother could face felony prosecution. The provider would need to offer an “affirmative defense” proving that the abortion was medically necessary within the confines of the state law. Under the new version of the law, the exceptions do not require an affirmative defense from providers. But providers could still face criminal charges if they violate the exceptions detailed in the law. The law makes North Dakota at least the 14th state with an active ban on nearly all abortions, though it is likely to face legal challenges, experts said. Since the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the constitutional right to abortion last year, conservative states have enacted restrictions or full bans. Liberal states have gone in the opposite direction, reaffirming abortion rights in state constitutions and becoming magnets for women seeking abortions in states with bans. North Dakota’s trigger ban was blocked last year by a district judge, after its sole abortion provider, the Red River Women’s Clinic, filed a lawsuit against the law. The State Supreme Court upheld the lower court’s ruling last month and said the state Constitution protected abortion rights in some situations. “North Dakota lawmakers are attempting to bypass the state Constitution and court system with this total ban,” said Elisabeth Smith, director of state policy and advocacy at the Center for Reproductive Rights, which brought the lawsuit on behalf of Red River clinic. “They made the exceptions a little bit less narrow but essentially tried to repackage the trigger ban.” Ms. Smith said the center was still analyzing the new law and had not “determined what the next steps will be.” Tammi Kromenaker, director of the Red River clinic, called the new law “an assault on bodily autonomy and abortion rights.” “This legislation is out of step with the people of North Dakota,” Ms. Kromenaker said. The Red River Women’s Clinic stopped offering abortions in the state, instead moving a short drive across the border to Moorhead, Minn., in August. But attorneys representing the clinic say it is important to ensure that the ban does not take effect, so that patients facing medical emergencies can receive abortions in hospitals and from their doctors. “North Dakota has been pro-life before statehood, and before Roe,” said the bill’s sponsor, Senator Janne Myrdal, a Republican. “I’m passionate about protecting women, but also their unborn children, that goes hand in hand.” Most states with sweeping abortion restrictions offer some exceptions to save the life of a mother, but translating those exceptions has sown confusion and turmoil among doctors and patients. In the months since the overturning of Roe v. Wade, very few exceptions to these new abortion bans have been granted, a New York Times review of available state data and interviews with dozens of physicians, advocates and lawmakers revealed. In last month’s opinion, the North Dakota Supreme Court raised concerns that a sweeping abortion ban might violate “a fundamental right to an abortion in the limited instances of lifesaving and health-preserving circumstances.”






Article: 33
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Iowa Governor Signs Six-Week Abortion Ban Into Law
Author: Colbi Edmonds
Publication_Date: July 14, 2023
Article_Content: The News Gov. Kim Reynolds of Iowa, a Republican, signed a strict abortion ban into law on Friday, even as a judge heard arguments to suspend it. Ms. Reynolds had vowed to sign the measure that was passed this week by the Legislature. It was immediately challenged in Polk County court by the American Civil Liberties Union and Planned Parenthood, and on Friday those groups were in court seeking to temporarily block the law while their legal case moved forward. The new law bans most abortions after cardiac activity is detected, which anti-abortion groups say is around six weeks of pregnancy, before most women know they are pregnant. It takes effect immediately, and dramatically changes abortion access in the state. “As we gather here today — and at this very moment — the abortion industry is in court trying to prevent this law from taking effect and stop the will of the people once again,” Ms. Reynolds said at the signing. Pam Jochum, the Democratic leader of the Iowa Senate, called the law a “dangerous attack on Iowa women” on Friday and said that she looked forward to “Iowa courts blocking this law.” ImageGov. Kim Reynolds, wearing a green dress and white blazer, claps at a podium while surrounded by a group of people.
Gov. Kim Reynolds signed a six-week abortion ban into law at the Family Leader Summit in Des Moines on Friday. Why It Matters The change now adds Iowa to a list of Republican-led states that have moved to ban or severely restrict the procedure since the Supreme Court eliminated the national right to abortion last year, sending the matter back to the states to set policy. The ban also shuts off another area of access for women in the region, as nearby states including Wisconsin, North Dakota and South Dakota also have abortion bans. More than a dozen states now have bans that prohibit most abortions after conception or very early in pregnancy. Background After the state’s previous six-week ban was blocked when a deadlocked Iowa Supreme Court left it unenforceable, Governor Reynolds called a special session on abortion. Lawmakers returned to the State Capitol and passed a nearly identical set of restrictions on the procedure. Iowa providers and abortion-rights advocates filed suit on Wednesday within hours of the Legislature’s passage, saying it was unconstitutional under the standard of “undue burden.” The session further cemented Iowa’s sharp political shift to the right, and ended its increasingly rare status as a Republican-led state where abortions are allowed up to 20 weeks post-fertilization, or roughly 22 weeks into pregnancy. The bill passed by Republicans allows for abortions until the point where there is what the bill calls “detectable fetal heartbeat,” a term that medical groups dispute. The legislation assumes this is roughly six weeks of pregnancy. The legislation includes exceptions after that point in cases of rape or incest, when the woman’s life is in serious danger or she faces a risk of certain permanent injuries, or when fetal abnormalities “incompatible with life” are present. The floor of a legislative chamber, with desks and people standing and sitting. The Iowa Senate debated the bill aimed at limiting abortion on Tuesday after it passed the House, at the State Capitol in Des Moines. What’s Next If abortion-rights activists prevail in court, the law could be suspended at least temporarily while the legal case proceeds. Joseph Seidlin, a district court judge in Polk County, said he would not make a ruling on Friday, even as the groups pushing for abortion rights said the law would lead to immediate harms. Mr. Seidlin said the decision required “strong and lengthy attention,” and making an immediate ruling from the bench would be perceived as a flippant decision. “I cannot think of anything that would be more insulting to either side,” he said. Peter Im, staff attorney at the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, had requested that the ruling be made from the bench because of the ban’s “devastating impacts for Iowans” and argued that the ban was a violation of state constitutional rights. “If there’s any wisdom to be gleaned from our nation’s experience during this past year, I think that it’s when there’s an abortion ban in place, people suffer,” Mr. Im said. Daniel Johnston, assistant attorney general in Iowa, said that under the “rational basis” test — used to determine whether the state has a legitimate interest in a law — the abortion law was constitutional. Mr. Johnston represents Governor Reynolds, the State of Iowa and the Iowa Board of Medicine. He said that the plaintiffs failed to consider the loss of “unborn life” as a result of abortion, and that the new law “aims to prevent the destruction of human lives.”







Article: 34
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: In Isolated Guam, Abortion Is Legal. And Nearly Impossible to Get.
Author: David W. Chen
Publication_Date: Published June 26, 2023 Updated June 27, 2023
Article_Content: The closest abortion clinic to Guam that is on American soil is in Hawaii, an eight-hour flight away. The tiny U.S. territory in the western Pacific Ocean is thousands of miles from the nearest state, and has no resident doctors who perform abortions. Court decisions could cut access to pills, the only legal option left. For decades, the Pregnancy Control Clinic, tucked inside a squat, beige building around the corner from a bowling alley, handled most of the abortions on Guam, a tiny U.S. territory 1,600 miles south of Japan. But the doctor who ran it retired seven years ago, and the clinic now appears abandoned. An old medical exam table stands near a vanity with a dislodged faucet, and a letter from Dr. Edmund A. Griley is taped to the front door: “My last day of seeing patients is November 18, 2016,” he wrote. “I recommend that you begin looking for a new physician as soon as possible.” Dr. Griley has since died, and his deserted clinic is a dusty snapshot of Guam’s past — and some say, its future. Though abortion is legal in Guam up to 13 weeks of pregnancy, and later in certain cases, the last doctor who performed abortions left Guam in 2018. The closest abortion clinic on American soil is in Hawaii, an eight-hour flight away. And a pending court case could soon cut off access to abortion pills, the last way for most women on Guam to get legal abortions. As anti-abortion activists around the country capitalize on momentum from the overturning of Roe v. Wade, Guam, a speck of land in the Pacific, stands out. Forces on both sides of the abortion debate say that the island of 154,000 people is on track to become the purest example of what life would be like under a near-total ban. More than a dozen states have banned most abortions, forcing women there who seek to terminate pregnancies to travel elsewhere, sometimes at great cost and risk to their health. But none is as isolated as Guam. An abandoned building with two palm trees on the right.  The Pregnancy Control Clinic, housed in this building, handled most of the abortions on Guam for decades. But the clinic appears abandoned since the doctor who ran it retired seven years ago. “Guam is a litmus test,” said the territory’s attorney general, Douglas Moylan, a Republican who opposes abortion. “If anti-abortion forces were to succeed anywhere in the United States, I would say Guam would be one of them.” There are two doctors who are licensed in Guam and willing to provide abortions, and both are based in Hawaii, where they can see patients through video calls and prescribe abortion pills. That could change if the Ninth Circuit, a federal appeals court, reinstates a territorial law that would require women to see a doctor in person in order to obtain pills. A streak of anti-abortion sentiment runs through Guam, and there are other attempts to further restrict the procedure. Mr. Moylan, the attorney general, is fighting in federal court to try to revive a 1990 law that banned nearly all abortions but was blocked by a federal judge. In the meantime, the legislature passed a bill last year that would prohibit most abortions after six weeks of pregnancy. It was vetoed by Gov. Lou Leon Guerrero, a Democrat, a nurse and the island’s first female governor. She recalled that as a student in California before the Roe v. Wade decision, she cared for women who were “hemorrhaging because either they self-aborted or they went to underground abortion clinics and they didn’t do it right.” As the head of the Guam Nurses Association, Ms. Leon Guerrero testified in opposition to the 1990 ban, which would have made it a crime to perform, undergo or seek an abortion, except in some medical emergencies, or to encourage women to have abortions. A federal court ruled that the law was unconstitutional and blocked the territorial government from enforcing it, but it remains on the books. “Everything that’s going around impacts Guam, and our women here, because we’re much more isolated in terms of access to health care,” the governor said. Women and men dance in a large hall. People dancing at Chamorro Village in Hagatna, Guam’s capital. Residents of Guam are American citizens and mostly identify ethnically either as Chamorro, the Indigenous people of the Mariana Islands, or as Filipino. Where America’s Day Begins Guam is so far to the west of the continental United States that its clocks are 15 hours ahead of Eastern Standard Time, in the same time zone as Vladivostok, Russia, and the east coast of Australia. The island promotes itself as “where America’s day begins.” But though they are American citizens, residents of Guam, who mostly identify ethnically either as Chamorro, the Indigenous people of the Mariana Islands, or as Filipino, cannot vote for president or send voting representatives to Congress. About one-third of the island is controlled by the Department of Defense, whose footprint is expanding. Though abortions are not available on the island’s military bases except in emergencies, the Pentagon will pay for abortion-related travel for troops serving in places where the procedure is illegal. Abortion has long been a taboo topic in Pacific island communities; about 80 percent of Guam’s inhabitants are Catholic, reflecting the island’s Spanish colonial past. A man in a blue shirt with yellow flowers stands near a fish tank. William Freeman, the last doctor who performed abortions when he left Guam, said that when he first arrived on the island 39 years ago, seven doctors performed abortions, and “phone calls threatening to kill us or blow us up” were routine. Dr. William Freeman, the last doctor who performed abortions on Guam, left the island in 2018. Dr. Freeman, who is now 78 and living in the Philippines, said that when he first arrived on Guam 39 years ago, the seven doctors who performed abortions often received “phone calls threatening to kill us or blow us up.” When he retired, a partner who opposed abortion declined to continue that part of their practice. Dr. Freeman suggested having doctors visit Guam for six-week stints to provide the procedure, but “no group was willing to make their clinic available,” he said. A row of young girls all wearing white dresses and veils stand in church pews. Mass at Dulce Nombre De Maria Cathedral-Basilica in Hagatna. About 80 percent of Guam’s inhabitants are Catholic, reflecting the island’s Spanish colonial past.‘Hope Is Rising’ The Guam law that requires women seeking an abortion to receive government-mandated information from a doctor — and only in person — has been blocked by a court order while a legal challenge proceeds. The two Hawaii-based doctors argue in their lawsuit that if the injunction is lifted, it would become practically impossible for them to assist women on Guam through telemedicine. That would be a victory, as far as the island’s Catholic officials are concerned. In an interview at the chancery of the Archdiocese of Agana, where Pope John Paul II stayed overnight in 1981, Father Romeo Convocar, the apostolic administrator, said that abortion pills obtained by telemedicine are now among his biggest concerns. Last summer, anticipating that the Supreme Court would soon reverse the Roe v. Wade decision, the archdiocese distributed a pastoral letter to be read aloud in its two dozen churches: “Hope is rising across our country that the scourge of abortion will be significantly curtailed.” Catholic officials pushed for the territory to adopt a six-week ban. They resumed conducting a ceremony for the burial of unclaimed fetuses from miscarriages or abortions. They applauded Mr. Moylan’s legal endeavors to reinstate the 1990 abortion ban. Two women stand in front of a billboard advertising counseling for women who have had abortions. Sharon O’Mallan, left, chairperson of the Guam Catholic Pro-Life Committee, and Agnes White, a nurse, in front of a billboard that they helped create. Sharon O’Mallan, chairperson of the Guam Catholic Pro-Life Committee, called the Dobbs decision overturning Roe v. Wade “great — now it turns it over to us, and we now decide what we want as our laws.” In late April, she and Agnes White, a nurse, pointed to a billboard that they had helped to create: “Healing the pain of abortion — one weekend at a time.” Tracking Abortion Bans Across the Country The New York Times is tracking the status of abortion laws in each state following the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade. The goal, they said, was to recruit women who had abortions to attend a confidential counseling retreat sponsored by an international religious group that opposes abortion. Four young women sit together on chairs and a couch. Members of Famalao’an Rights, a reproductive rights nonprofit founded in 2019, from left: Stephanie Lorenzo, Ha’ani L. San Nicolas, Chloe Weilbacher and Kiana Joy Yabut. 'I Would Gladly Go to Jail' Advocates of abortion rights fear what will happen on Guam — which has high rates of sexual assault and maternal mortality — if access to abortion pills is effectively blocked. The lawsuit filed by the Hawaii doctors, for instance, argues that women on Guam would face heightened medical risks, as well as daunting financial and logistical burdens. (According to census data, the median annual household income, excluding military families, was $58,000 in 2019, or about 20 percent below the national average.) Famalao’an Rights, a reproductive rights nonprofit founded in 2019,stepped up its organizing in 2022 when the proposed six-week ban was gaining traction. A legislative committee’s 2,200-page report on the bill crackled with anguished emails and handwritten letters from the public, mostly opposing the ban. Then came the Dobbs decision and its aftermath. “It just felt like we were at the top of the hill, so close to the finish line, and then the finish line moved,” said Kiana Joy Yabut, a leader in the group. The Dobbs decision was demoralizing for the activists, who are bracing for more anti-abortion bills and preparing to help women obtain abortions, even if it means breaking the law. “I would gladly go to jail,” Ms. Yabut said. Women on Guam said they have already been dealing with the difficulty and stigma of abortion for years. A young woman sits on the floor leaning on a sofa. When Happy Tingson became pregnant in 2015, her best friend drove her to the Pregnancy Control Clinic, which has since closed, for an abortion. Happy Tingson was working as a hotel housekeeper in 2015, when she became pregnant. She told only two people: her best friend, Rhea Patino, and her boyfriend at the time. “Not a single smile on his face,” said Ms. Tingson, who was comforted by Ms. Patino and another friend when she became emotional during an interview at her sister’s house. “He was pretty much saying, ‘It’s not the right time for us to have it, we’re not financially stable,’ ” Ms. Tingson said. Ms. Patino drove Ms. Tingson to the Pregnancy Control Clinic, which has since closed, to receive the procedure, which cost $500 in 2015. “When I finally got it done, I felt kind of broken,” Ms. Tingson said. She never told her parents, who are now dead, she said. She still hasn’t told her older brother. Asked if any of her friends had also undergone an abortion, Ms. Patino interrupted: “Me.” When Ms. Patino, a waitress, became pregnant in the fall of 2020, she and her boyfriend at the time agreed that they could not afford to raise a child. “I felt helpless,” she said. “Try talking to a doctor, and they’re like, ‘I’m sorry, we don’t support that.’ ” Ms. Patino, who by then was seven weeks pregnant, decided that the most reliable option was to fly to Florida. Planned Parenthood unexpectedly waived its $500 fee for her. “They said the fact that you came from Guam, and had to fly out here — it’s so sad, because you have no clinic out there,” Ms. Patino, now 32, recalled. “That’s so dangerous. How can they do that to you guys?” A man with a fishing pole stands near a child on the shoreline. More than a dozen states have banned most abortions, forcing women there who seek to terminate pregnancies to travel elsewhere. But none of the states with bans are as isolated as Guam.







Article: 35
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Anti-Abortion Activist Who Kept Fetuses Is Convicted in Clinic Blockade
Author: Anushka Patil
Publication_Date: Aug. 30, 2023
Article_Content: Lauren Handy and four others were found guilty of illegally blocking access to a Washington abortion clinic. No charges have been filed in connection with five fetuses that were found in her home last year. Lauren Handy was found guilty of federal civil rights offenses, alongside four other anti-abortion activists. Prosecutors said she directed the invasion and blockade of an abortion clinic in Washington, D.C., in 2020. Five anti-abortion activists, including one who was found to have kept five fetuses in her home last year, were found guilty of federal civil rights offenses on Tuesday after blocking access to an abortion clinic in Washington, D.C., in 2020. Lauren Handy of Virginia, who prosecutors said directed the invasion and blockade of the abortion clinic on Oct. 22, 2020, and her co-defendants were each convicted of a felony charge of conspiracy against rights and of violating the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act. The law makes it a crime to threaten, obstruct or injure a person seeking access to a reproductive health clinic or to damage clinic property. Prosecutors said that Ms. Handy had arrived for an appointment she had made at the clinic under a false name. She and other defendants “forcefully pushed” their way into the waiting room and used their bodies, furniture, chains and ropes to block its doors, prosecutors said. The defendants, who were livestreaming their blockade on Facebook, blocked a patient from entering the treatment area and left a nurse with a sprained ankle, prosecutors said. Also convicted in the case were Herb Geraghty of Pittsburgh; William Goodman of the Bronx; John Hinshaw of Levittown, N.Y.; and Heather Idoni of Linden, Mich. They each face up to 11 years in prison. A sentencing date has not been set.  Four others who were charged in connection with the clinic’s blockade are scheduled go on trial next week. A 10th defendant pleaded guilty in March. Ms. Handy became the focus of widespread public attention in March 2022, the day after she was charged in connection with the clinic blockade, when the police announced they had found five fetuses in a home that the anti-abortion group said was hers. The Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia said investigators had acted on a tip about “potential biohazard material.” The local CBS affiliate television station WUSA reported at the time that investigators carried evidence out of Ms. Handy’s basement in red biohazard bags and coolers. Ms. Handy declined to say what was in the coolers, but said “people would freak out when they heard,” the station reported. The investigation into the fetuses was ongoing, and no one has been charged in connection with the discovery, the police said on Wednesday. The police department has previously said that the abortions of the fetuses were legal under D.C. law and that their investigation would focus on how the remains ended up in the house. Ms. Handy and the founder of the anti-abortion group, Terrisa Bukovinac, claimed that they obtained a box of 115 fetuses from the driver of a medical waste truck outside the clinic that Ms. Handy previously blockaded. The activists claimed that they buried 110 of the fetuses and said that their lawyer had asked the police to retrieve the five remaining ones from her home, saying they were considered evidence of violations of federal laws. The medical waste company that owned the truck denied that account and said it was cooperating with the authorities. Ms. Handy and her co-defendants have already taken steps to appeal their convictions, the executive director of Progressive Anti-Abortion Uprising, Caroline Taylor Smith, said in a phone interview. Because the federal jury found that the defendants acted with violent force, they were immediately taken into custody and held at the Alexandria Detention Center in Virginia, Ms. Smith said, adding that the group was “more motivated than ever” to push for the repeal of the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act. The federal law was passed in 1994 in response to an escalation in violent attacks by anti-abortion activists on clinics and doctors, including on Dr. David Gunn, who was fatally shot during a protest outside his clinic in Pensacola, Fla., in 1993. Dr. Gunn’s murder is believed to be the first targeted killing of an abortion provider in the United States.







Article: 36
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: South Carolina House Passes Six-Week Abortion Ban
Author: Kate Zernike
Publication_Date: May 17, 2023
Article_Content: The News The South Carolina House of Representatives approved a ban on most abortions after six weeks of pregnancy on Tuesday night, setting up a repeat fight in a red state that has become an unexpected battleground over abortion. The vote came after roughly 24 hours of often rancorous debate in a rare special session called by the governor, and fell largely along party lines, 82 to 33. Because the House amended a bill passed earlier by the Senate, the bill now goes back to the Senate for another vote. A stately domed building at the edge of a garden and grass lawn framed by trees. In South Carolina, the House and the Senate have so far been unable to come to an agreement on the parameters of an abortion ban. Why It Matters If the bill is passed by the Senate, it would then head to the governor’s desk. His approval, if granted, would dramatically reduce abortion access for women in the state and across the region. Most Southern states have passed abortion bans since the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade last June. But because the South Carolina legislature has not been able to agree on the terms of a ban, the state still allows abortion up until 22 weeks of pregnancy. Abortion providers say this makes the state a crucial access point for women in other Southern states, especially since North Carolina this week passed a law banning most abortions after 12 weeks. Abortion opponents, as well as some lawmakers who support a right to abortion, worry that the state has become a destination for the procedure. Background The bill will test a South Carolina Supreme Court ruling in January, which found a right to abortion in the state Constitution and struck down a previous six-week ban. That opinion was written by the court’s only female justice, who retired shortly after. The legislature replaced her with a man, who was supported by the conservative Freedom Caucus in the House. Republicans are hoping that the new court will overturn the abortion decision, allowing a stricter ban. But the House and the Senate, despite both being controlled by Republicans, haven’t been able to agree on where to draw the line. The House is more conservative and tried to pass a ban on most abortions starting at conception. The Senate considered and rejected that bill three times this year, blocked by the five women of the chamber — three Republicans, a Democrat and an independent — who call themselves the “Sister Senators.” The women have suggested a ban after the first trimester, or putting the question of abortion rights to voters on a ballot initiative, but Senate leadership has rejected those measures. What’s Next Gov. Henry McMaster, a Republican who supports a six-week ban, called the Senate into its own special session next week to debate the House version of the bill. The “Sister Senators” have said that they will filibuster again, which could block a final vote on the bill. While two of the Republicans in that group voted in favor of the six-week ban that the Senate passed in February, they have said that they cannot support the amendments that the House added in the bill.






Article: 37
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: The Story Behind DeSantis’s Anecdote About an ‘Abortion Survivor’
Author: Lisa Lerer and Nicholas Nehamas
Publication_Date: Aug. 25, 2023
Article_Content: Gov. Ron DeSantis used a jarring anecdote to dodge a debate question about a six-week federal abortion ban, catching the attention of viewers on social media, who speculated that Mr. DeSantis was fabricating the story. Ron DeSantis wanted to dodge a debate question about a six-week federal abortion ban. So the Florida governor pulled out a personal story, one that had recently become part of his pitch to voters on the need for greater regulation of abortion rights. “I know a lady in Florida named Penny,” he said. “She survived multiple abortion attempts. She was left discarded in a pan. Fortunately, her grandmother saved her and brought her to a different hospital.” He then pivoted to attack Democrats for their abortion “extremism.” The jarring anecdote caught the attention of viewers on social media, who speculated that Mr. DeSantis was fabricating the story. But Penny does exist. Mr. DeSantis’s campaign says the governor has met her. She is Miriam Hopper, who goes by Penny and is an anti-abortion activist who lives in Florida and calls herself an “abortion survivor.” The details of Ms. Hopper’s birth in 1955 are impossible to verify. But at least one prominent obstetrician noted that medical advances and practices had changed so dramatically in the nearly seven decades since then that her story had little relevance for the current debate about abortion rights and policy. At the time of her birth, abortion was illegal. Even an attempted abortion could have resulted in fines and imprisonment for a provider. Ms. Hopper did not return a call for comment this week. But she told her story in an online video posted by Protect Life Michigan, an anti-abortion advocacy group. The video, part of a broader campaign, was posted in September 2022 amid a campaign against a ballot initiative that would enshrine abortion rights in Michigan’s Constitution. So-called abortion survivors have been a staple of the anti-abortion movement for years, frequently appearing in campaign ads and testifying on Capitol Hill in favor of federal abortion bans. According to Ms. Hopper, her mother sought medical care at a clinic in central Florida in 1955 because of bleeding and other complications. She was 23 weeks pregnant, right at the outer edge of when a fetus is considered able to survive outside the womb. The doctor who examined Ms. Hopper’s mother said he could not hear a heartbeat. He induced labor, she said. “You do not want this baby to live — if it lives, it will be a burden on you all of your life,” Ms. Hopper says the doctor told her parents before instructing a nurse to discard the baby — “dead or alive.” Ms. Hopper said she had weighed one pound 11 ounces at her birth. The nurse “placed me in a bedpan on the back porch of the clinic,” she said. When her grandmother and aunt arrived, they found Ms. Hopper. Her grandmother called the police. A nurse helped take Ms. Hopper to a hospital in Lakeland, Fla., where she survived several bouts of pneumonia. Ms. Hopper’s mother, aunt, father and grandmother have died. It does not appear that the incident was covered in news reports. After an extended stay, Ms. Hopper went home and had a “great life.” She married her high school sweetheart, had two children of her own and has seven grandchildren. “Life has value, and all lives matter,” she said, at the end of the video. In a 2013 interview with the Florida radio station WFSU, conducted in the middle of a statehouse debate over new abortion restrictions, Ms. Hopper said that her story was based on what she had been told by her family. She said that her father, raised during the Great Depression, did not want another child and that she suspected a botched abortion had sent her mother to the hospital with the complications. Diane Horvath, an obstetrician and gynecologist who performs abortions until 34 weeks at a clinic in Maryland, said it was difficult to parse Ms. Hopper’s account. “There’s a lot of parts of this story that don’t make sense to me,” she said, noting that 68 years ago, physicians had lacked the current-day technologies to keep very premature babies alive. In the 1950s, death was “virtually ensured” when an infant was delivered at or before 24 weeks of gestation, according to a report published in 2017 by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine. By contrast, a study conducted last year by a team of neonatologists found that nearly 56 percent of infants who are born at 23 weeks survive — if they receive aggressive treatment in a neonatal intensive care unit. Even if Ms. Hopper’s story is accurate, it’s not particularly germane to a discussion of current abortion practices or regulations, Dr. Horvath said. “It doesn’t represent the reality of medical practice at this moment,” she said. “It’s not really relevant to what we should be talking about when we talk about access to abortion.” Fewer than 1 percent of abortions occur after 21 weeks’ gestation, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Such procedures are generally difficult to receive, with only a limited number of facilities offering them. The Republican presidential primary debate wasn’t the first time Mr. DeSantis had told a version of this story. He debuted the narrative last weekend at a town hall in Nashua, N.H., amid a shift in his messaging that was meant to evoke a more personal touch. The moment came in response to a question from a voter who described himself as a “traditional Catholic” and asked Mr. DeSantis, who has signed a six-week abortion ban in Florida and has tried to dodge questions on whether he supports a similar ban nationwide, how he would “protect the life of the unborn.” Mr. DeSantis said he had met “Penny” in person in central Florida, and then launching into a similar version of the story he told on Wednesday night, including the details about Ms. Hopper’s grandmother and the pan, and trying to paint Democrats as the extremists on abortion. “You know, that’s a very callous thing to happen,” Mr. DeSantis said. Most Democratic officeholders say the government should not legislate such decisions and should leave them to a woman and her doctor. Ryan Tyson, a top DeSantis campaign adviser, said the governor was making an effort to talk more about the people he had encountered on the trail. His campaign did not provide details about the circumstances of his meeting with Ms. Hopper. “He’s out there — he’s meeting people,” Mr. Tyson said in an interview after the debate. “He’s hearing their stories as he gets across the country. And I think that’s why you saw he had a moment there, because it does take a toll on you.”







Article: 38
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: South Carolina Supreme Court Upholds Abortion Law, Reversing Earlier Decision
Author: Kate Zernike
Publication_Date: Aug. 23, 2023
Article_Content: The ruling, by a newly all-male bench, allows the state’s new six-week abortion ban to take effect. The South Carolina Statehouse in Columbia. The South Carolina Supreme Court on Wednesday upheld the state’s new near-total ban on abortion by a 4-1 vote, reversing a decision it had made in January that struck down a similar ban and declared that the State Constitution’s protections for privacy included a right to abortion. The court’s decision was not unexpected, because the makeup of the bench had changed, and Republicans in the State Legislature had passed a new abortion law in the hopes that it would find a friendlier audience with the new court. The decision in January was written by the court’s only female justice; she retired and South Carolina now has the nation’s only all-male high court. The decision repeated what the justices said in January about a right to privacy in the State Constitution, but said the Legislature had addressed the concerns in the first law and “balanced” the interests of pregnant women with those of the fetus. “To be sure, the 2023 Act infringes on a woman’s right of privacy and bodily autonomy,” Justice John Kittredge wrote for the majority. But, he added, “We think it is important to reiterate: we are constrained by the express language in the South Carolina Constitution that prohibits only ‘unreasonable invasions of privacy.’ “The legislature has made a policy determination that, at a certain point in the pregnancy, a woman’s interest in autonomy and privacy does not outweigh the interest of the unborn child to live.” The new law bans abortion after embryonic cardiac activity can be detected, which is generally around six weeks of pregnancy. Until now, South Carolina had allowed abortion until 22 weeks, which had increasingly made the state a haven for women seeking abortions as other Southern states banned the procedure. The leaders of the Republican majority in the Senate celebrated the decision, saying in a statement that South Carolina was “no longer an abortion destination but a refuge for the unborn.” They suggested they would push for a total ban on abortion, which is the goal of anti-abortion groups. Jenny Black, the chief executive of Planned Parenthood South Atlantic, said the decision would force women to carry pregnancies against their will, and puts the “dangerous politicization of South Carolina’s highest court on full display.” “This abortion ban is nearly identical to the ban struck down by this court just months ago — the only thing that has changed is the makeup of the court,” she said in a statement. South Carolina, one of the nation’s most reliably red states, has become an unlikely battleground over abortion rights in the year since the United States Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, which for 50 years protected a right to abortion under the federal constitution. The state’s Republican-controlled Legislature had passed a law in 2021 banning abortion when cardiac activity can be detected, typically around six weeks of pregnancy, and that law took effect when Roe was overturned. Abortion rights advocates and medical providers sued, as they did against bans in other states, arguing that a right to abortion was protected in the state’s constitution, which clearly states a right to privacy. The court surprised many reproductive rights supporters in January when it agreed with them. But the court’s 3-2 decision also said that right “was not absolute, and must be balanced against the state’s interest in protecting unborn life.” Anti-abortion lawmakers had been trying to pass an even stricter ban, one starting at conception, and quickly set about trying to craft a law that would satisfy the justices’ concerns in the January decision. They hoped to take advantage of a key change on the bench: the January decision had been written by Kaye Hearn, the court’s only female justice, who has since retired. The legislature replaced Justice Hearn with a man, who joined the majority Wednesday. Still, Republican leadership had run into unexpected opposition from female lawmakers. Nicknaming themselves “the Sister Senators,” the only five women in the State Senate — a group that included three Republicans — blocked a near-total ban on abortion by filibustering until the legislative session ran out. Gov. Henry McMaster, also a Republican, then called a rare special session to get the legislature to vote on a bill for a six-week ban. While the Sister Senators held out on their opposition, the men who had joined them in blocking a total ban supported the six-week law. As long as the Legislature could not pass a new law, abortion remained legal in South Carolina until 22 weeks of pregnancy. Many lawmakers worried about statistics showing that the number of abortions in South Carolina had increased largely because so many women were coming from other states that had passed bans. The oral arguments in the case in June revolved around whether a six-week ban affords women enough time to have what one justice in his January concurrence called “meaningful choice” in deciding whether to end a pregnancy. A lawyer for the plaintiffs argued the law was “materially indistinguishable” from the one the court struck down in January, and that six weeks is too early for many women to know they are pregnant and make arrangements for an abortion. Doctors date pregnancy to the first day of a woman’s last monthly period, so six weeks is roughly two weeks after she has missed a regular period. The state requires her to have multiple doctor visits and scans before she can get an abortion. Lawyers for the state argued that the Legislature had “in very good faith” addressed the objections in the court’s January decision, adding three provisions including one that explicitly states that emergency contraception — known as the morning after pill, which prevents rather than terminates pregnancy — would remain legal. Women could “adjust their behavior accordingly,” they argued, using pills instead of resorting to abortion. The lawyers noted that according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 45 percent of abortions nationwide in 2020 occurred in the first six weeks, arguing that this indicated many women did in fact know they were pregnant at six weeks. (Most abortions — 93 percent — take place in the first trimester.) Grayson Lambert, a lawyer for the state, argued that women could know they were pregnant seven to 10 days after conception, or at three to four weeks of pregnancy — before she would be expecting her regular period. Chief Justice Donald W. Beatty, who sided with the majority to overturn the earlier ban, was dubious: “Could know?” he asked. “Anything is possible, what about probable?” He was the sole dissenter in the court’s decision on Wednesday. In his dissenting opinion, Chief Justice Beatty wrote: “The result will essentially force an untold number of affected women to give birth without their consent. I am hard-pressed to think of a greater governmental intrusion by a political body.”








Article: 39
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Nikki Haley Answers a Thorny Abortion Question: Should Women Be Punished?
Author: Jazmine Ulloa
Publication_Date: July 26, 2023
Article_Content: The former South Carolina governor — who is trying to break out in a packed 2024 Republican presidential primary — gave a nuanced response on one of the thorniest issues facing Republicans. Nikki Haley addressed supporters in the rain on Tuesday at a town hall event in Hollis, N.H. One voter asked about her position on abortion restrictions. At town halls and political events in New Hampshire, where she has made far more campaign stops than her rivals, Nikki Haley has mostly sidestepped any discussion of abortion, a fraught issue for the Republican Party. As the G.O.P. activist base tries to pull state lawmakers further to the right in curbing access to abortion, moderates worry that the hard-line stance has already handed electoral wins to Democrats and could have dire consequences in 2024. Ms. Haley, a former governor of South Carolina and United Nations ambassador, has tried to pull off a difficult balancing act on the issue, and her attempts haven’t always resonated — partly because, her critics say, she has avoided discussing details. On Tuesday, with more than 100 people gathered in a drizzle for a town hall at a picturesque vineyard in Hollis, Christina Zlotnick, 55, an undeclared voter from Amherst, posed a hard question. Ms. Haley provided little by way of concrete policy proposals, but this time she drew an enthusiastic response. A Question for Nikki Haley “You said on TV that women who get abortions should not be put in jail and should not be subject to the death penalty. But how exactly should women who get illegal abortions — women like me — how do you specifically think we should be punished?” The Subtext Since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, Republican-dominated state legislatures have rushed to institute new laws outlawing or imposing stringent restrictions on abortion, even as the issue has fueled Democratic victories across the nation, with Americans supporting at least some access to the procedure at record levels. Most abortions are now banned in 14 states. Some state laws stipulate narrow but vague exceptions, and carry years of prison time. Last week, a teenager in Nebraska who used abortion pills to end her pregnancy, and who pleaded guilty to illegally concealing human remains, was sentenced to 90 days in jail. At the time, abortion was banned in Nebraska after 20 weeks. In the past, anti-abortion activists have largely maintained that they don’t support punishing women who seek out the procedure illegally. But more recently, some state lawmakers have proposed legislation with criminal consequences for patients as well as those who may help them. Haley’s Answer “In order for us to have a federal law, we’re going to have to have consensus. What does that consensus look like? Can’t we all agree that we don’t want late-term abortion? Can’t we all agree that we want to encourage more adoptions and good-quality adoption so that children feel more love, not less? Can’t we all agree that doctors and nurses who don’t believe in abortion shouldn’t have to perform them? Can’t we all agree that contraception should be accessible? And can’t we all agree that a woman who gets an abortion should not be subject to the death penalty or get arrested? That’s where I think we start — we start, and we do it with a level of respect. No more demonizing this issue. We’re going to humanize this issue. I had a roommate who was raped in college. I wouldn’t wish on anyone what she went through, wondering if she was OK. Everybody has a story. Let’s be respectful of everybody’s story, and let’s figure out what we can do together instead of sitting there and tearing each other apart.” The Subtext Ms. Haley began her reply by flatly stating that she did not believe women needed to be punished, adding that she was “unapologetically pro-life,” but did not “judge anyone for being pro-choice.” She went on to explain her support for the Supreme Court decision that thrust the issue back to the states but said she did see a role for the federal government in setting abortion policy, as long as there was congressional consensus between Republicans and Democrats. Her answer mostly echoed her previous remarks on abortion, but delivered with passion, it seemed to pack a more powerful punch in front of a smaller, friendlier audience. Attendees nodded along or expressed whoops and hollers in agreement, breaking into applause as she ended. Many Republican and independent women at her events this week have said they see Ms. Haley as a strong leader and messenger on abortion, as the only Republican woman in the presidential race, and believe she might be able to blunt attacks from Democrats on the issue. Ms. Haley’s positions on the topic tend to be more moderate than the rest of the field, and it is among the issues she has used to set up her bid as a test of the Republican Party’s attitudes about female leaders, without leaning too far into her gender. After the event, Ms. Zlotnick, who once had to take a drug to end an unviable pregnancy — a procedure that is not illegal — said she phrased her question as a hypothetical because if she found herself in different circumstances, she would consider having an illegal abortion. She said she was a strong believer in reproductive rights but had been satisfied with Ms. Haley’s response.






Article: 40
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Florida Supreme Court Considers Upholding Abortion Restrictions
Author: Patricia Mazzei
Publication_Date: Sept. 8, 2023
Article_Content: Several justices questioned whether Florida’s constitutional privacy rights extend to abortion, as has been longstanding legal precedent. Florida’s Supreme Court hears arguments over the 15-week abortion ban on Friday, Sept. 8, 2023, in Tallahassee, Fla. The Florida Supreme Court’s conservative justices repeatedly questioned on Friday whether the state’s privacy rights extend to abortion as they considered whether to uphold a ban on the procedure after 15 weeks of pregnancy — a decision that could overturn decades of legal precedent and trigger a far more restrictive ban. Such a decision would cement Florida’s transformation from a haven for women seeking abortions in the American South to a state with some of the most severe restrictions on the procedure, which were enshrined into law by Republicans who have also shifted the ideological balance of the high court from liberal to conservative. Should the court affirm the 15-week ban, as expected, that would trigger the more recently approved six-week ban to take effect 30 days later, a dramatic policy shift for a state that up until last year allowed abortions up to 24 weeks of pregnancy. Few women know they are pregnant by six weeks, and abortion rights backers say such an early ban amounts to near total prohibition. The justices did not indicate when they would rule. During a closely watched oral argument in Tallahassee on Friday, a lawyer for Planned Parenthood, the American Civil Liberties Union of Florida and several abortion providers argued that the court should not narrow the scope of the privacy rights that Floridians have relied on for 40 years. The state’s solicitor general countered that the court erred in extending privacy rights to abortion, as it first did in 1989. Several justices appeared sympathetic to the state, questioning whether Florida voters intended for the explicit right to privacy written into the State Constitution in 1980 to include abortion. The constitutional provision states: “Every natural person has the right to be let alone and free from governmental intrusion into the person’s private life.” “If the original public meaning of that text included abortion, you would expect to see positions from Planned Parenthood and National Right to Life debating each other in 1980,” Justice John D. Couriel told the lawyer for the plaintiffs. “And yet we don’t really see that.” Whitney Leigh White, the plaintiffs’ lawyer, countered that lawmakers and voters understood in 1980 that the privacy clause “unambiguously” extended to decisions that people could make about their own bodies, which she called “decisional privacy.” “Legislators were fully informed and fully on notice that the privacy laws were broad,” she said, adding that voters subsequently rejected an amendment in 2012 that would have exempted abortion from constitutional privacy protections. But Henry Whitaker, the solicitor general, said that lawmakers and voters in 1980 were trying to protect people from government intrusion into their personal data, which he called “informational privacy.” “As a matter of common sense, intrusion — not interference, intrusion — into a person’s private life are words that are historically associated with informational privacy,” he said. The privacy argument was also used in the landmark Roe v. Wade decision that enshrined the federal right to abortion in 1973. U.S. Supreme Court justices rejected that argument in their decision to overturn Roe last summer. Florida’s abortion picture has been confusing for more than a year. The 15-week ban, enacted in 2022 shortly before Roe was overturned, was allowed to take effect while the case challenging its constitutionality wound its way through the courts. A trial judge ruled that it violated the state’s privacy protections. Then, in April of this year, Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican who is now running for president, and the G.O.P.-held State Legislature enacted the six-week ban, with the 30-day trigger clause should the 15-week ban be affirmed in court. A coalition of groups that includes Planned Parenthood and the A.C.L.U. is seeking to put a question on the Florida ballot next year asking voters to amend the State Constitution to effectively include the right to abortion up to around 24 weeks. Mr. DeSantis has campaigned on reshaping the court by appointing five of its seven justices. The other two justices were also appointed by a then-Republican governor, Charlie Crist. One of them, Justice Charles T. Canady, sponsored anti-abortion legislation as a member of Congress and is married to State Representative Jennifer Canady of Lakeland, who co-sponsored the six-week abortion ban this year in the State House. One of Mr. DeSantis’s appointees, Justice Jamie R. Grosshans, did pro bono legal work for pregnancy centers that discourage women from having abortions, The Miami Herald reported in 2020. The Washington Post reported earlier this year that another DeSantis appointee, Chief Justice Carlos G. Muñiz, once affirmed Florida’s constitutional abortion protections in a legal article. On Friday, Chief Justice Muñiz and Justice Grosshans acknowledged that a ruling in the state’s favor would affect myriad other precedents unrelated to abortion that have relied on a broad interpretation of privacy rights over the past 30 years. But Chief Justice Muñiz also said that society has debated abortion for decades amid new medical advancements. If lawmakers should now decide that abortion should be restricted, he continued, then it may not be the court’s role to say that is inappropriate. “This is a 50-year reflection by our society, by our state,” he told Ms. White. “The people’s elected representatives believe there is a compelling interest in protecting human life. Why should we as a court not defer to that?”






Article: 41
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Federal Appeals Court Further Limits Abortion Access on Guam
Author: David W. Chen
Publication_Date: Aug. 2, 2023
Article_Content: The News A federal appeals court ruled late Tuesday that women on the American territory of Guam who are seeking medication abortion must first have an in-person consultation with a doctor, which is likely to make access to the procedure on the remote island even more difficult. Abortion-rights supporters said that since there were no doctors on Guam who provided abortions, the ruling created a significant obstacle for women seeking the procedure. The only two doctors licensed to provide abortions on the U.S. territory are based in Hawaii, an eight-hour flight away. Until now, those doctors have been prescribing pills over video calls. But in a unanimous ruling, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit said other doctors on the island could provide in-person consultations, even if those physicians did not want to provide abortions themselves. “Guam has legitimate interests in requiring an in-person consultation,” the judges said. “The consultation can underscore the medical and moral gravity of an abortion and encourage a robust exchange of information.” A flyover view of Guam’s coastline.
Though abortion is legal in Guam up to 13 weeks of pregnancy, and later in certain cases, the last doctor who performed abortions left the island in 2018. Why It Matters There are at least 15 states where most abortions are now banned, requiring women who seek to terminate pregnancies to travel elsewhere, sometimes at great cost and risk to their health. But none are as isolated as the territory of Guam — making the island of 154,000 people a “litmus test” of what life would be like under a near-total ban, its attorney general, Douglas Moylan, a Republican who opposes abortion, told The New York Times this year. Though abortion is legal in Guam up to 13 weeks of pregnancy, and later in certain cases, the last doctor who performed abortions left the island in 2018. Central to the case decided on Tuesday before the appellate court, which is based in San Francisco, was whether Guam residents could continue receiving that care via telemedicine, or whether they would have little choice but to leave the island — something that is prohibitively expensive for most residents. Background Abortion has long been a taboo topic on the culturally conservative island where about 80 percent of the inhabitants are Catholic. In 1990, Guam passed what was then described as among the most draconian abortion bans in the country, making it a crime to perform, undergo or seek an abortion — except in some medical emergencies — or to encourage women to have abortions. A federal court ruled that the ban was unconstitutional and blocked the territorial government from enforcing it, but the attorney general is fighting to try to revive the ban. With the 1990 law still blocked, Guam’s Legislature has since passed additional restrictions. One such measure was the in-person consultation law, which was challenged in January 2021 by a local lawyer, Vanessa L. Williams, in conjunction with the American Civil Liberties Union, on behalf of the two doctors based in Hawaii. That law was then blocked by a federal judge, allowing the doctors to send abortion pills. But with the momentum of the Supreme Court decision last year that overturned the national right to abortion, the Guam attorney general’s office said the injunction should be lifted. Oral arguments were heard in February in Honolulu before a three-judge panel — two appointed by President Donald J. Trump and the third by President George W. Bush. What’s Next The court’s ruling takes effect in 21 days. Alexa Kolbi-Molinas, deputy director of the A.C.L.U. Reproductive Freedom Project, said the plaintiffs were considering their options. But she said that she was “deeply disappointed” by the ruling, and that it “imposes unnecessary obstacles on people seeking abortion in Guam.” In a WhatsApp message, Mr. Moylan applauded the decision, saying it reflected the island’s “rich cultural values.” “Over the past 50 years since Roe v. Wade, Guam’s People have shown a clear desire to prohibit and restrict abortions,” he said.




Article: 42
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Reaction to Texas Abortion Pill Ruling: Outrage, and Muted Praise
Author: Maggie Astor and David W. Chen
Publication_Date: April 7, 2023
Article_Content: Democrats and abortion-rights leaders said the decision could be a catastrophe and used the moment to criticize Republicans, who remained relatively quiet on Friday. Hundreds of people in February protested the lawsuit filed in Texas against the Food and Drug Administration. As Americans digested a Texas judge’s ruling on Friday night invalidating the Food and Drug Administration’s approval of the abortion drug mifepristone — and a contradictory ruling from a Washington State judge ordering the F.D.A. to maintain its approval as is in some states — the divide in political reactions was as much between words and silence as it was between pro- and anti-abortion rights. National Democratic officials reacted with a torrent of statements condemning the Texas judge, Matthew J. Kacsmaryk, for seeking to remove from the market a drug that women have safely used for more than two decades. Many Democratic and abortion-rights leaders made it clear that the Texas ruling had not, for the time being, cut off women’s access to the medication. But they also used the moment to denounce Republicans — a recognition that Democrats have won in recent elections by tapping into voters’ fury over the loss of abortion rights. Republican officials were relatively quiet on the rulings on Friday night, and talked about almost anything else on social media: transgender athletes, China, fentanyl and Israel. Many, like Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida, tweeted in recognition of Good Friday. Senator Cindy Hyde-Smith, Republican of Mississippi, was an exception, writing on Twitter that the abortion ruling was “a victory for pregnant mothers & their unborn children.”  Democratic senators and representatives called the ruling “outrageous,” “extreme” and “devastating.” Several Democratic governors, including Gavin Newsom of California, Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan and Kathy Hochul of New York, vowed to keep abortion legal and accessible in their states, without going into detail on how. “The Extreme MAGA Republican assault on abortion care is spreading across America like a malignant tumor,” Representative Hakeem Jeffries of New York, the Democratic House minority leader, wrote on Twitter. “Let’s be clear: Abortion bans have become the definitive litmus test of the 2024 GOP primary,” Jaime Harrison, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, tweeted. The response from those who oppose abortion fell largely to the Alliance Defending Freedom, the right-wing group that led the Texas lawsuit, and to advocacy groups that are pushing Republicans to enact further restrictions. “This is a significant victory for the doctors and medical associations we represent and, more importantly, the health and safety of women and girls,” Erik Baptist, a lawyer for the Alliance Defending Freedom, told reporters on Friday evening, adding that he could not comment on the Washington ruling because he had not read it yet. Jeanne Mancini, the president of March for Life, which opposes abortion, called the ruling “a major step forward for women and girls whose health and safety have been jeopardized for decades by the F.D.A.’s rushed, flawed and politicized approval of these dangerous drugs.” There is robust scientific evidence that mifepristone is safe. Katie Glenn, the state policy director for Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, similarly called the ruling “a win for the health and safety of women and girls.” She called the Washington case “concerning.” Alexis McGill Johnson, the president and chief executive of Planned Parenthood, which provides abortions and lobbies for abortion rights, emphasized that access to mifepristone would not immediately change. “But we should all be enraged that one judge can unilaterally reject medical evidence and overrule the F.D.A.’s approval of a medication that has been safely and effectively used for more than two decades,” Ms. McGill Johnson said, arguing that the ruling “exposes the weaponization of our judicial system to further restrict abortion nationwide” and that it “could threaten the F.D.A.’s role in this country’s public health system.” Attorney General Lynn Fitch of Mississippi, who led a coalition of Republican attorneys general who wrote a brief supporting the Texas lawsuit, praised the ruling in a Twitter post. Democratic governors and attorneys general condemned the ruling without, for the most part, promising specific actions. In a statement, the co-chairs of the Democratic Attorneys General Association, Kathy Jennings of Delaware and Aaron Ford of Nevada, said: “While there are still unknown elements and effects of these rulings, rest assured: Democratic attorneys general will be on the front lines of the fight to protect abortion access in every corner of our country.” Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington, a Democrat, offered a specific plan earlier this week. On Tuesday — with Judge Kacsmaryk’s ruling expected any day — he announced that his state had purchased 30,000 doses of mifepristone in what he called an “insurance policy.” Combined with another 10,000 doses that the state had asked the University of Washington to purchase, the stockpile is a four-year supply. The state went through the Department of Corrections, using its pharmacy license, rather than the Department of Health, Mr. Inslee said, because existing laws and rules made it easier to buy the medication that way. In an interview on Friday night, Mr. Inslee said he was confident that even if the Texas order were upheld, and even if the Washington ruling were overturned, “we have the right under our state law to dispense the product. Not all states have state laws that allow that; ours do.” Asked what advice he was giving clinics or providers who might have been confused by the dual rulings on Friday, he said: “They should make medical decisions. They should continue to give advice to women and their patients, just as they did before this decision out of Texas.”






Article: 43
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: DeSantis Signs Six-Week Abortion Ban in Florida
Author: Patricia Mazzei, David W. Chen and Alexandra Glorioso
Publication_Date: April 13, 2023
Article_Content: The prohibition is among the most restrictive in the country, and Florida will no longer be a destination for women from across the Deep South seeking the procedure. Supporters of abortion rights gathered outside Tallahassee City Hall to protest a bill that would ban abortions after six weeks of pregnancy. MIAMI — Florida lawmakers voted to prohibit abortions after six weeks of pregnancy on Thursday, culminating a rapid effort by elected Republicans and Gov. Ron DeSantis to transform the state to one of the most restrictive in the country. Mr. DeSantis, a likely 2024 Republican presidential contender, signed the new ban late on Thursday night with little fanfare. The ban will end Florida’s long-held role as a destination for women from across the Deep South seeking abortions and force them to travel farther, to states such as North Carolina or Illinois, for care. In the six months after the Supreme Court overturned the federal right to abortion last year, no state saw a greater increase in the number of legal abortions performed each month than Florida, according to a report released on Tuesday. “For the past 50 years, we’ve had a culture grow in this nation — a culture of abortion for any reason at any time,” State Representative Jenna Persons-Mulicka, a Fort Myers Republican, said before the 70-40 vote. “Today we lead. Today we stand for life. We stand with mothers, and we stand with Florida families. And by your vote today, we change the culture of abortion to a culture of life.” Seven Republicans, mostly from Southeast Florida and the Tampa area, broke with their party and voted against the ban. Nine representatives did not vote. Mr. DeSantis signed the six-week ban despite the complicated politics the issue presents. The new restriction would help him, to an extent, with conservative Republicans in a presidential primary but would likely be far less appealing to many moderate Republicans and independent voters in a general election. Underscoring the ban’s thorny politics, Mr. DeSantis chose to sign the bill without public notice at 10:45 p.m. in his office, surrounded by supporters. In contrast, he signed the 15-week ban last year at a morning event before a large audience at a church in Central Florida. The governor is scheduled to speak on Friday at Liberty University, an evangelical Christian institution in Virginia, to an audience that will surely welcome the six-week ban. Prohibiting abortion at that stage in pregnancy would have not long ago seemed unthinkable in Florida, which until recently was a swing state governed from near the political center, rather than the far right. The new ban is among several sweeping and divisive measures adopted over the past month by the Florida Legislature, which was empowered by Mr. DeSantis’s landslide re-election victory. The governor has signed laws allowing people to carry concealed weapons without a permit and broadly expanding school vouchers. State senators passed a bill banning medication and surgery for children seeking gender transitions and another prohibiting children from attending certain drag shows. Approval of the six-week abortion ban by the Florida House of Representatives was a foregone conclusion on Thursday. Still, over more than seven hours of discussion, Democrats offered dozens of amendments, none of which were adopted. Protesters interrupted the tense discussion, prompting Republican leaders to clear the viewing gallery. The demonstrators briefly gathered outside the chamber, chanting, “Hands off our bodies!” Surrounded by others, a man in a dark suit and red tie speaks at a podium featuring a sign that says, “Protect Life.” Gov. Ron DeSantis spoke to supporters before signing a 15-week abortion ban into law in April 2022. As recently as a year ago, Florida allowed abortions until 24 weeks of pregnancy. Then, last spring, Mr. DeSantis and state lawmakers limited access to the procedure after 15 weeks, a major change that took effect in July and is still being legally challenged. The new six-week ban is contingent, in part, on whether the Florida Supreme Court upholds the 15-week restriction. In the past, the court has ruled that the explicit right to privacy guaranteed by the State Constitution protects abortion rights. But that was before Mr. DeSantis appointed several more conservative justices, who have shifted the court’s ideological balance. Most of the 13 states that prohibit almost all abortions are in the South, including Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana. Florida would now join Georgia at the next-most-restrictive level with the six-week ban, around the time when fetal cardiac activity can be detected. At that  gestation stage, many women do not yet realize that they are pregnant. At the same time, dueling court rulings and legal challenges over the use of an abortion drug have made the future of medication abortions unclear. Mr. DeSantis’s signature on the Florida ban keeps the Republican Party pressing deeper into abortion restrictions, even as some of the party’s activists are pleading with politicians to step back. Senator Tim Scott, a South Carolina Republican who announced a presidential exploratory committee on Wednesday, said he would back a nationwide ban on abortions at 20 weeks — a position framed as a moderate middle ground but one that Democrats nonetheless seized on to frame the recent anti-abortion drive as a threat to Democratic states. Protesters hold up signs outside the Supreme Court building. 
People rallied in front of the Supreme Court ahead of hearings in the Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization case in 2021. David Winston, a veteran pollster for the House Republican leadership, worried that Republican politicians, pressed by conservative activists, were moving much faster than most voters want. “People are trying to take next steps without taking a step back and asking, How do we get to decisions that would seem to voters to be a reasonable next step?” he said. But Katie Glenn Daniel, state policy director for the anti-abortion group Susan B. Anthony Pro Life America, said such concerns were overblown, noting Republicans’ electoral victories in Florida last year after the 15-week ban was adopted.“What we see is that when candidates stake out a position, are clear about that position and don’t let their opponents define them because they’ve taken the ostrich position, burying their heads in the sand and hoping they go away, they do well,” she said. While legal abortions in the United States fell by 6 percent in the six months after the decision overturning Roe v. Wade — Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization — Florida recorded the largest numerical increase of any state: 1,200 a month. The share of all U.S. abortions performed there, moreover, increased to 9.5 percent, from 7.5 percent, trailing only California and New York, according to a report from WeCount, a research project from the Society of Family Planning, which supports abortion rights. In Tallahassee, the Planned Parenthood health center has seen a doubling of abortion patients since the Dobbs decision. In all, the number of out-of-state patients seeking abortions has quadrupled at nine Planned Parenthood health centers along the state’s northern border and east coast. Should the six-week abortion ban take effect, access would be far more difficult. According to data compiled by Caitlin Myers, an economist at Middlebury College, the average driving distance to the closest abortion provider in Florida is 22 miles, or about half an hour. A six-week ban would make it 607 miles, or more than nine hours. There were 54 abortion providers in Florida at the end of 2022, according to data from Advancing New Standards in Reproductive Health at the University of California, San Francisco. There are only a handful of providers, by contrast, in the two other states in the Southeast where abortion remains more accessible, for now — South Carolina and North Carolina. Three men hold signs in front of a building. One sign reads, “Babies Killed Here.” Anti-abortion activists outside a clinic that provides abortions in Clearwater, Fla., in February. Since the United States Supreme Court overturned Roe last summer, Democrats have won elections that centered on abortion rights in other states, including this month in Wisconsin, where voters chose a liberal candidate for the State Supreme Court who all but promised that she would help reverse an 1849 abortion ban. But in Florida, Republicans won handily last November, even after Democratic candidates pressed the abortion issue. Mr. DeSantis, however, rarely brought up abortion during his re-election campaign and has continued to emphasize other issues, a tacit acknowledgment that, as past public opinion polls have shown, a majority of Floridians — and of Americans — want to keep most abortions legal. Florida’s 15-week abortion ban became law last year before the overturning of Roe v. Wade. That decision led abortion opponents to step up pressure on the state to go even further in restricting the procedure. Republicans, who hold supermajorities in both legislative chambers, introduced the six-week prohibition in March, on the first day of the annual lawmaking session. In Thursday’s debate, Democrats argued that the ban would force women to seek care in other states or to see their pregnancies through. That would have a profound effect on marginalized and vulnerable communities, they said. Democrats also recounted the stories of Florida women who have publicly discussed over the past year how they have had to carry nonviable pregnancies because doctors would not terminate them. State Representative Robin Bartleman, a Weston Democrat who last year said she agonized over whether to end a pregnancy with a fatal fetal abnormality, tearfully shared her experience again. “Do you know how painful that was?” she said. “Do you know how terrible that was? No one here belonged in that room with me.” Republicans argued that they were saving lives. “I favor an outright ban on abortion,” said State Representative Mike Beltran, a Riverview Republican. “This is a compromise. For every person who thinks this goes too far, there are folks who feel that it doesn’t go far enough.” The State Senate approved the ban this month with a vote of 26-13. Two freshman Republicans, Senators Alexis Calatayud of Miami and Corey Simon of Tallahassee, joined Democrats in voting no. “I gave them my word that I would support Florida’s current law of 15 weeks,” Ms. Calatayud said of her constituents. Mr. Simon expressed a similar sentiment. Later that day, the police in Tallahassee arrested 11 people who were protesting the legislation outside City Hall, which is across the street from the Florida Capitol, including the chairwoman of the Florida Democratic Party and the Senate minority leader. The six-week ban will take effect 30 days after the Florida Supreme Court either upholds the 15-week ban from last year, reinterprets the privacy clause in the State Constitution or revisits prior cases to decide that the clause does not apply to abortion rights. Alternatively, if Florida were to amend the State Constitution to say the privacy clause does not apply to abortion rights, the six-week restriction will also take effect 30 days later. Surrounded by several women standing on steps, a woman speaks at a podium featuring a sign that says, “Keep Abortion Legal.”  State Representative Anna V. Eskamani voiced her opposition to the near total abortion ban bill at a news conference in Tallahassee in March. The six-week ban would provide exceptions for abortions to take place until 15 weeks for pregnancies that resulted from rape, incest or human trafficking, as long as the woman provides documentation such as a restraining order, medical record or police report. The 15-week ban passed last year  included exceptions only for a fatal fetal abnormality or to save the life of the woman. The new law would also prohibit doctors from prescribing medication abortions through telehealth, making Florida’s six-week ban even more restrictive than Georgia’s, according to Kaiser Family Foundation, and from dispensing the pills by mail. And it would bar state funds from being used for a person to travel outside of Florida for an abortion, except for when it is a medical emergency or when federal law requires it. To groups that oppose abortion, the anticipated six-week ban is a welcome victory. “When the governor signs this, it is going to make a huge impact,” said Ingrid Duran, director of state legislation for the National Right to Life Committee. By contrast, Sarah Parker, president of Women’s Voices of Southwest Florida, a nonprofit that defends reproductive rights, started camping out on Monday night in Tallahassee as part of a weeklong protest. “This is going to affect millions of people,” she said. “And if it’s not happening in your state, it will.”







Article: 44
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Ohio Voters Reject Constitutional Change Intended to Thwart Abortion Amendment
Author: Michael Wines
Publication_Date: Aug. 8, 2023
Article_Content: The contest was seen as a test of efforts by Republicans nationwide to curb voters’ use of ballot initiatives. Voting at the Miami Township Civic Center in Ohio on Tuesday. Ohio voters rejected a bid on Tuesday to make it harder to amend the State Constitution, according to The Associated Press, a significant victory for abortion-rights supporters trying to stop the Republican-controlled State Legislature from severely restricting the procedure. The abortion question turned what would normally be a sleepy summer election in an off year into a highly visible dogfight that took on national importance and drew an unprecedented number of Ohio voters for an August election. Late results showed the measure losing by 13 percentage points, 56.5 percent to 43.5 percent. The roughly 2.8 million votes cast dwarfed the 1.66 million ballots counted in the state’s 2022 primary elections, in which races for governor, the U.S. Senate and the U.S. House were up for grabs. The contest was widely seen as a test of Republicans’ efforts nationwide to curb the use of ballot initiatives, and a potential barometer of the political climate going into the 2024 elections. Two campaign signs, one for and one against, are posted under a tree outside the Franklin County Board of Elections in Columbus, Ohio. Supporters and opponents of the ballot initiative have poured tens of millions of dollars into trying to sway Ohio voters. Organizations that opposed the proposal called the vote a decisive rebuff of the State Legislature, which had ordered the referendum in an attempt to derail a November vote on a constitutional amendment that would guarantee abortion rights.
“It was about a direct connection with the abortion issue for many voters,” said Kelly Hall, the executive director of the Fairness Project, one of the leaders of the Ohio campaign against the proposal. “But there were many others who saw it as a power grab by some legislators. “The resounding rejection of their attempt means that voters know what’s up when they’re being asked to vote their rights away.” The ballot measure would have required that amendments to the State Constitution gain approval by 60 percent of voters, up substantially from the current requirement of a simple majority. Republicans initially pitched that as an attempt to keep wealthy special interests from hijacking the amendment process for their own gain. The lawmakers voted largely along party lines in May to put the proposal on the ballot. But from the start, that reasoning was overtaken by weightier arguments, led by — but hardly confined to — the abortion debate. The Ohio Legislature passed some of the nation’s strictest curbs on abortion last year, banning the procedure as early as six weeks into pregnancy, in the wake of the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade. The Ohio Supreme Court is considering the constitutionality of those curbs, but the law’s passage drove a successful grass-roots campaign this year to place an abortion-rights amendment on the November ballot. That amendment would upend the new law by giving women legal control over reproductive decisions, allowing doctors to make medical judgments on the need for abortions, and restricting the state to regulating abortions only after a fetus is judged viable. Raising the threshold for adopting an amendment to 60 percent of votes would have put the fate of the proposed amendment in greater doubt. In two polls, 58 percent and 59 percent of respondents supported granting a constitutional right to abortion access. Voters walking into the Knox Presbyterian Church to cast their ballots in Cincinnati on Tuesday. The August election drew an uncharacteristically high number of Ohio voters. In the 111 years that Ohio voters have had the power to propose and vote on ballot initiatives, only about a third of constitutional amendments managed to exceed 60 percent, according to the political data website Ballotpedia. Other provisions also rejected in the Tuesday referendum would have raised hurdles even to putting amendments on the ballot. One required backers of amendments to gather a minimum number of signatures from all 88 Ohio counties instead of the current 44 counties. Another eliminated their ability to correct errors in signatures that were rejected by state officials. The Legislature’s move to raise barriers to new amendments came weeks before abortion rights advocates delivered petitions with roughly a half million verified signatures to state offices, more than enough to force the November vote.  Tuesday’s election had become something of a proxy for the November election, with supporters of abortion access and anti-abortion forces waging a multimillion-dollar preview of the coming battle. Ballotpedia estimated last week that at least $32.5 million had been spent on the battle, split roughly equally between the two sides. Eight in 10 dollars came from donors outside Ohio, that estimate said, including $4 million from a single donor, Richard Uihlein, the Illinois founder of a nationwide packing and shipping company, Uline Inc., who is one of the country’s most prolific patrons of right-wing causes. Jackie Napp casts her ballot at the Miami Township Civic Center in Ohio on Tuesday. Her son, Harvey, watches her vote. Other out-of-state donors to supporters of the legislature’s proposal included Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, a Washington, D.C. anti-abortion advocacy group that contributed nearly $6.4 million. The Concord Fund, one of several organizations controlled by Leonard Leo, who has overseen campaigns to confirm Republican nominees to the U.S. Supreme Court, was another donor. The leading out-of-state donors to opponents of the Legislature’s proposal included the Sixteen Thirty Fund, a Washington D.C. supporter of progressive causes that gave $2.64 million; the Tides Foundation, another donor to progressive causes that gave $1.88 million; and Karla Jurvetson, a Palo Alto, Calif., doctor and Democratic Party donor who gave nearly $1 million. Beyond the battle over abortion, it appeared that some voters were simply put off by the tactics the Legislature used to get the proposed restrictions before voters. Just last December, lawmakers outlawed almost all August elections, saying so few people voted in them that they had become easy prey for special interests with enough money to turn out their supporters. The lawmakers reversed course in May when it became clear that a vote on an abortion rights amendment was likely in November. More than a few critics noted that Tuesday’s referendum was, in essence, an election pushed by special interests with an abundance of money. Voters wait in line in front of a brick wall outside a community center in Miami Township in Ohio Turnout has been high across Ohio to vote on the proposed change in how the State Constitution can be amended. Among some who voted against the proposal, the anger over the Legislature’s tactics was evident. “This is one of the lowest, below-the-belt actions I’ve seen in politics ever,” Jim Nicholas, a medicine major at Case Western Reserve University, said outside a polling place at a middle school in Shaker Heights, a doggedly liberal Cleveland suburb. In Miami Township, a Cincinnati suburb that went strongly for Donald J. Trump in 2020, Tom Baker, 46, called the referendum a last-minute attempt by the State Legislature to tilt the playing field in favor of “all of the touchstones the aging conservative population is trying to force on generations.” “I don’t like the idea of changing the mechanisms of government,” he said, “especially for an agenda.” That kind of skepticism carried no weight with many backers of the Legislature’s restrictions. “Evil never sleeps,” said Bill McClellan, 67, as he cast a ballot at a crowded polling place in Strongsville, on Cleveland’s southwest side. “The liberals don’t like that Ohio is a red state, and they continue to attack us.”
 




Article: 45
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Supreme Court Briefly Preserves Broad Availability of Abortion Pill
Author: Adam Liptak
Publication_Date: April 14, 2023
Article_Content: The temporary stay is meant to preserve the status quo while the justices study lower court rulings, and it did not forecast how they would ultimately rule. The case has returned the Supreme Court to an issue it had said it was ceding to elected officials in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which overturned Roe v. Wade. WASHINGTON — Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. issued an order on Friday temporarily ensuring that a common abortion pill would remain widely available while the Supreme Court considered whether to grant the Biden administration’s emergency request to preserve the Food and Drug Administration’s approval of the drug. The order was meant to maintain the status quo while the justices studied the briefs and lower court rulings, and it did not forecast how the court would ultimately rule in the most important case about access to abortion since its conservative majority overturned Roe v. Wade last June. Justice Alito set a brisk schedule for the court’s consideration of the case. His order, an administrative stay, instructed the groups challenging the F.D.A.’s approval of the abortion drug, mifepristone, to file their brief by Tuesday at noon. The stay itself is set to expire on Wednesday at midnight, meaning the court is very likely to act before then and could in the coming days further curtail access to abortion, even in states where it is legal. For now, though, Justice Alito, the member of the court responsible for overseeing the appeals court whose ruling is at issue, restored the state of affairs that existed before a ruling last week by a federal judge in Texas that would have suspended the agency’s approval of the pill and severely disrupted the availability of mifepristone. The justice’s order was prompted by an emergency application filed Friday morning by the Biden administration asking the justices to intervene. The administration’s brief asked the court to pause parts of an appeals court ruling that had limited the availability of the pill, part of the most commonly used method for ending pregnancies in the United States. “If allowed to take effect, the lower courts’ orders would upend the regulatory regime for mifepristone, with sweeping consequences for the pharmaceutical industry, women who need access to the drug, and F.D.A.’s ability to implement its statutory authority,” the brief said. In a second emergency application, filed by Danco Laboratories, which makes the branded version of mifepristone, the company’s lawyers said the justices should defer to the F.D.A.’s scientific expertise in determining that the drug was safe and effective. On Wednesday night, a three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, issued a mixed decision, staying the most sweeping aspects of a decision from Judge Matthew J. Kacsmaryk that would have wholly overridden the Food and Drug Administration’s approval of the pill after more than two decades. But the appeals court, in an unsigned order from a divided three-judge panel, temporarily let stand other aspects of Judge Kacsmaryk’s ruling, including by requiring in-person visits with doctors, rolling back the availability of the pills from the first 10 weeks of pregnancy to seven weeks and barring dispensing them by mail. The panel’s ruling was provisional, and the court put the appeal itself on a relatively fast track, scheduling arguments for May 17. The case was brought by several doctors and medical groups, including the Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine, which was incorporated in August in Amarillo, Texas, where the case was filed. Judge Kacsmaryk, a Trump appointee who is a longtime opponent of abortion, is the only federal judge in the Amarillo division in the U.S. District Court of the Northern District of Texas. The appeals court majority wrote that the statute of limitations appeared to bar a challenge to the F.D.A.’s initial approval of the pill in 2000. But it said that later expansions of access to the pill were properly before the judge and that there were authentic safety concerns warranting suspension of regulations making it easier to obtain the pills. The majority added that the plaintiffs appeared to have standing to sue because they might have to treat complications from the use of the pill. In the Biden administration’s emergency application in the Supreme Court, Solicitor General Elizabeth B. Prelogar, representing the F.D.A., wrote that the plaintiffs lacked standing to challenge a drug they neither take nor prescribe and that they had provided no basis for second-guessing the agency’s scientific judgment. Rather, she wrote, they relied on implausible speculation. “F.D.A.’s approval of the drug does not require them to do or refrain from doing anything,” she wrote. “Yet the Fifth Circuit held that the associations have standing because some of their members might be asked to treat women who are prescribed mifepristone by other providers and who then suffer an exceedingly rare adverse event.” In the emergency application by Danco Laboratories, the company’s lawyers said the appeals court’s ruling had created “regulatory chaos.” “Leaving the Fifth Circuit’s ruling in place will irreparably harm Danco, which will be unable to both conduct its business nationwide and comply with its legal obligations,” the company’s brief said. “The lack of emergency relief from this court will also harm women, the health care system, the pharmaceutical industry, states’ sovereignty interests and the separation of powers.” Judge Kacsmaryk once worked for First Liberty Institute, which says it is the largest legal organization in the nation focused exclusively on defending religious freedom. Democrats voted against confirming him to the bench in 2019 because of his history of opposing L.G.B.T.Q. rights. In his ruling, Judge Kacsmaryk adopted the language of abortion opponents, referring to abortion providers as “abortionists,” to the challenged procedure as “chemical abortion” and to the fetus as an “unborn human” or “unborn child.” Legal scholars said the judge had relied on questionable scientific studies. The government’s emergency application was harshly critical of the judge’s ruling. “The district court countermanded a scientific judgment F.D.A. has maintained across five administrations; nullified the approval of a drug that has been safely used by millions of Americans over more than two decades; and upset reliance interests in a health care system that depends on the availability of mifepristone as an alternative to surgical abortion for women who choose to lawfully terminate their early pregnancies,” Ms. Prelogar wrote. The application said the ruling was also novel. “To the government’s knowledge,” she wrote, “this is the first time any court has abrogated F.D.A.’s conditions on a drug’s approval based on a disagreement with the agency’s judgment about safety — much less done so after those conditions have been in effect for years.” The case has returned the Supreme Court to an issue it not long ago said it was ceding to elected officials in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which eliminated a constitutional right to abortion after nearly 50 years. Writing for the majority, Justice Alito said that the political branches, rather than the courts, should set abortion policy. The Dobbs decision concerned the Constitution, while Judge Kacsmaryk’s ruling mostly turned on principles of administrative law. But the new case demonstrated that legal disputes over abortion will continue to engage the justices. The stakes are high. More than five million women have used mifepristone to terminate their pregnancies in the United States, and many studies have found it to be safe and effective. The drug is also approved for use in dozens of other countries. In the United States, the protocol typically involves mifepristone in combination with a second drug, misoprostol, that are used in the first 10 weeks of pregnancy. About 60 percent of abortions in that time employ the two drugs rather than surgery. The first drug blocks the effects of progesterone, a hormone without which the lining of the uterus begins to break down. The second one, taken 24 to 48 hours later, induces contractions of the uterus that expel its contents. If access to mifepristone is limited, abortion providers may rely solely on misoprostol, which can be used on its own but is somewhat less effective and more prone to cause side effects. The appeals court’s order is in conflict with ones issued by a federal judge in Washington State in another lawsuit related to mifepristone. That lawsuit, filed against the F.D.A. by Democratic attorneys general from 17 states and the District of Columbia, challenged extra restrictions that the agency imposes on mifepristone and asked the judge to prevent it from limiting access to the drug. Judge Thomas O. Rice of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Washington, an Obama appointee, did not lift the additional restrictions but ordered the F.D.A. to maintain the status quo. He blocked the agency from curbing the availability of mifepristone in the states that filed the lawsuit. Lawyers for Danco wrote that the dueling orders put it “in an impossible position.” The F.D.A., they wrote, “cannot permit Danco to simultaneously operate two separate distribution networks for two different parts of the country; that simply is not how the federal regulation of pharmaceuticals works.”








Article: 46
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Idaho Supreme Court Upholds Abortion Bans
Author:  Ava Sasani
Publication_Date: Jan. 6, 2023
Article_Content: The justices found that the state’s Constitution does not include a right to the procedure, bringing an end to a monthslong legal battle. Anti-abortion activists in Boise, Idaho, after the overturning of Roe v. Wade in June. Idaho’s Supreme Court upheld the state’s prohibition on abortion in a ruling Thursday night that said the State Constitution does not include a right to the procedure. The decision means the state’s three abortion bans — including one that outlaws the procedure from conception — can remain in effect. The ruling came just hours after South Carolina’s State Supreme Court went the other direction and overturned an abortion ban there, saying the state’s constitutional right to privacy includes the right to abortion. Around a dozen states have abortion bans, many of which are being challenged in courts. Those challenges are the result of  a U.S. Supreme Court decision last year to remove the constitutional right to abortion that had been guaranteed for nearly 50 years by Roe v. Wade. That decision handed the matter to the states to decide. The lawsuits are part of a wider strategy by those who support abortion rights to establish a right to abortion under each state’s constitution, in lieu of the federal protections previously offered by Roe. State supreme court decisions are important because they effectively represent final resolutions about whether abortion is legal or not in individual states. Federal appeals, the typical next step, may mean the question winds up back at the U.S. Supreme Court, which has already weighed in on the matter. Other paths to change a state supreme court ruling are narrow: a state could try to amend its own constitution through its legislature or in ballot initiatives. In the 3-2 ruling, the Idaho Supreme Court delivered a sweeping victory for abortion opponents by backing all three state laws restricting the procedure, marking the end of a monthslong court battle. Lawyers for Planned Parenthood, a leading provider of abortions in the country, argued that the procedure is implicit in Idaho’s Constitution, which protects the right to privacy and due process. The justices rejected that argument and said that Planned Parenthood lawyers failed to show abortion was “deeply rooted” in the state’s history and traditions. “To the contrary, the relevant history and traditions of Idaho show abortion was viewed as an immoral act and treated as a crime,” Justice Robyn Brody wrote in the majority opinion. Idaho has three separate bans: one that allows family members of the aborted fetus to sue abortion providers in civil court, another that prohibits abortions after six weeks of pregnancy, and a third that bans all abortions from conception, with exceptions for rape, incest or a medical threat to the life of the mother. The strictest of the three laws has been partially in effect since late August. A lawsuit brought by the U.S. Justice Department has blocked a part of that law that allows doctors and abortion providers to be sued and convicted in criminal court. That case is still pending. Under that law, providers who are convicted face up to five years in prison, and could have their medical license suspended for at least six months. It allows doctors to cite rape, incest or an effort to save the life of a pregnant woman as a defense in a trial. But the woman must provide a police report in cases of rape or incest. Right to Life of Idaho, which believes abortion is murder, praised the court’s decision. The justices “upheld pro-life laws that were passed by the representatives of the people.” Rebecca Gibron, chief executive of Planned Parenthood Great Northwest, Hawaii, Indiana, Kentucky, said it was “a dark day for the state of Idaho,” but added that “our fight is far from over.” Mary Ziegler, a law professor at University of California, Davis, said the rulings in Idaho and South Carolina underscore the importance of state supreme courts, particularly in states like Idaho that hold judicial elections. Idaho’s five justices are elected in nonpartisan elections, or, in the case of a midterm vacancy, appointed by the governor. Four of the five current justices in Idaho, a deeply Republican state that voted to re-elect Donald Trump for president in 2020, were appointed by a Republican governor. For abortion rights advocates, state courts can offer a more favorable legal stage, because any federal challenge could eventually land in front of the U.S. Supreme Court, the same bench that overturned Roe. The disparate rulings in Idaho and South Carolina offer some insight into the political and legal variables that will determine the future of abortion access in conservative states. In both states, abortion rights advocates argued that the right to have an abortion is implied by the state constitution’s privacy protections, applying the argument set forth in Roe v. Wade at the state level. This pursuit of a “mini Roe” sometimes succeeds because many state constitutions, including South Carolina’s, have more robust privacy protections than the federal Constitution. The decision to uphold the near-total ban on abortion is a setback for the Biden administration, which has been trying to block abortion bans and ensure access to abortion with limited success. The U.S. Justice Department filed its own lawsuit against Idaho, challenging the near-total abortion ban in August. A federal judge temporarily blocked part of Idaho’s abortion ban after the Justice Department argued that the measure violated a federal law known as the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act, which requires medical professionals in hospitals that accept Medicare funding to take whatever steps are necessary to ensure the physical well-being of patients, including pregnant women. Because the Justice Department’s challenge is based on a federal law that is unrelated to the Idaho Constitution, the lower court’s injunction remains in place, meaning doctors still cannot be punished for acting to protect the health of endangered mothers. But Ms. Ziegler and other legal experts said that although the Justice Department’s suit contains a different legal question than the one addressed in Thursday’s ruling, the Idaho Supreme Court’s decision will most likely have a chilling effect on doctors who perform abortions, even in emergency medical situations that are supposed to be covered by the federal court’s injunction. Now that the Idaho Supreme Court declined to enshrine the right to abortion in the State Constitution, a doctor who provides an abortion is entirely betting on the success of the Justice Department’s lawsuit, she said. A federal suit could ultimately “land in front of the same court that overturned Roe,” Ms. Ziegler said. In his dissent, Justice John R. Stegner wrote that the severe consequences of misinterpreting Idaho’s abortion law will “ensure that those doctors must delay lifesaving medical care to seek legal advice prior to performing an abortion.” “Women will leave this great state as a result of this decision, as will the people who love them and wish to see them healthy and alive,” he wrote. “As much as that saddens me, I cannot blame them.”








Article: 47
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Senate Democrats Seek to Highlight G.O.P. Opposition to Abortion Rights
Author: Annie Karni
Publication_Date: June 21, 2023
Article_Content: Democrats brought to the floor a set of bills intended to protect women’s health and reproductive freedom, knowing they would be blocked by Republicans. “As we fight to get the votes we need to restore Roe, it’s imperative that we make plain to the country just how extreme and dangerous Republicans’ anti-abortion agenda is,” Senator Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, said in a statement. Senate Democrats on Wednesday forced consideration of measures intended to protect women’s health and reproductive freedom, using the upcoming anniversary of the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade to remind voters of Republican opposition to measures with broad voter approval. Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic majority leader, brought to the floor four bills that would protect a woman’s right to abortion access and contraception. He did so under a procedure that requires unanimous consent of the Senate, meaning that an objection from a single Republican lawmaker would result in their failure. That was the point: to force Republicans to block what Democrats described as common-sense bills that protect existing rights, and to highlight how opposition to abortion rights and related issues has become a political liability at the national level for the G.O.P. “As we fight to get the votes we need to restore Roe, it’s imperative that we make plain to the country just how extreme and dangerous Republicans’ anti-abortion agenda is,” said Senator Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, who organized the initiative to bring the bills to the floor. Some Republicans dismissed the maneuver as nothing more than a blatantly partisan “Dobbs messaging festival,” coming during a busy week of committee work before Congress leaves for a two-week recess. (The case that overturned the right to abortion is Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization.) But Mr. Schumer said Democrats were using it to “expose the Republicans’ radical, anti-choice agenda for what it is: an endless pursuit of a nationwide abortion ban.” “Republicans, deep down, want to ban abortions for everyone, everywhere,” he said. The proposed legislation the Senate took up Wednesday afternoon included a bill that would enshrine into law the right to use birth control; a bill that would ensure women can travel freely to receive abortion care; a bill to ensure doctors can continue to safely provide legal abortion care and protect health care providers from being held liable for providing services to patients from other states; and a bill to protect people’s online health data so it cannot be used against them. The outcome seemed preordained: Republicans blocked many of those same bills last year. And on the Senate floor on Wednesday, they railed against all four bills, arguing that putting them forward served only to underscore Democrats’ “obsession” with abortion and address problems that didn’t exist. Senator Mike Braun, Republican of Indiana, objected to codifying the protection of contraception, arguing, “This bill is not about contraception, it’s about abortion.” He said the legislation’s “ulterior motive” was to protect access to abortion, because it included a provision that would guarantee funding for Planned Parenthood. Senator Mike Lee, Republican of Utah, said there was “an obsession on the left with abortion” and that a bill to ensure women could travel to receive abortion care was “dealing with a phantom problem, a phantom law that does not exist.” There are currently no abortion bans that attempt to prosecute women who cross state lines to seek an abortion. But Senator Catherine Cortez Masto, Democrat of Nevada, said that “constitutional rights don’t enforce themselves” and that many states were looking at laws that would do just that. “What we do have an obsession with is freedom,” Ms. Cortez Masto said in an impassioned retort on the floor. Senator Cindy Hyde-Smith, Republican of Mississippi, said protecting online health data could be a bipartisan issue. But, she said, “one-sided efforts to promote abortion is not the way to find common ground on this issue.” And Senator Ted Budd, Republican of North Carolina, objected to protecting doctors and health care providers from liability simply because “it would make it easier for unborn life to be ended.” Last year, the Senate failed to pass legislation to guarantee abortion rights nationwide, as Republicans and one Democrat in the Senate blocked an effort to enshrine the Roe v. Wade precedent in federal law. Since the overturning of Roe, 14 states have passed near-complete bans on abortion. An additional eight states have passed abortion bans that are temporarily blocked in court. But the backlash has also helped boost Democrats in national elections. A record number of Americans say they support at least some access to abortion, according to recent polls. Reaction to the Dobbs decision helped mitigate an expected “red wave” in last year’s midterm elections. Still, House Republicans have continued appealing to their conservative base, which has made opposition to abortion rights a litmus test, by trying to make access to abortion even harder. In the second policy bill they brought to the floor after taking back control of the House in January, Republicans pushed through legislation that could subject doctors who perform abortions to criminal penalties. Representative Elise Stefanik, Republican of New York, said in a speech this week that protecting life was not an extreme position. Speaking in front of an anti-abortion group, Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, Ms. Stefanik tried to frame Democrats and progressives as extremists. “Pro-life advocates were beaten by radicals in the streets, illegally targeted by President Biden’s F.B.I., and arrested in their homes with their children present for peacefully protesting and standing for life,” she said. Ms. Stefanik was referring to the case of Mark Houck, who was charged by the Justice Department last year for assaulting a volunteer at a Planned Parenthood center in Philadelphia. His wife claimed that a SWAT team had come to arrest him at home in front of their seven children. Still, it is not clear that that message is resonating with voters. Representative Sharice Davids, Democrat of Kansas, won re-election last year in a district that was at the center of the fallout from the Dobbs decision, a red state where residents voted overwhelmingly to reject an initiative that would have ended abortion rights in the state. “It was very impactful when it came to my re-election efforts,” Ms. Davids said in an interview this week, referring to the Supreme Court’s decision a year ago. “It’s an interesting tactic for folks with more extreme positions on this stuff to continue to push — even when voters have shown up at the ballot box to say this is not the thing we want you, Congress, to be legislating.” On Tuesday, the Senate confirmed Julie Rikelman, an abortion-rights lawyer, as a federal appeals court judge. Ms. Rikelman represented the Mississippi abortion clinic in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization.







Article: 48
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Deadlocked Iowa Supreme Court Leaves Abortion Legal Through 20 Weeks
Author: David W. Chen
Publication_Date: June 16, 2023
Article_Content: The News
A legal attempt to ban abortion in Iowa after six weeks of pregnancy failed on Friday, after the State Supreme Court deadlocked over whether to vacate a lower court’s injunction and allow the ban to take effect. That means abortion will remain legal in Iowa through 20 weeks of pregnancy. Why It Matters As one state after another banned or sharply limited access to abortion after Roe v. Wade was overturned, Iowa’s status as a place where abortion remained accessible was at stake. The Iowa ban “was dangerous, cruel and unconstitutional when the district court blocked it four years ago, and it’s still dangerous, cruel and unconstitutional today,” said Rita Bettis Austen, legal director of A.C.L.U. of Iowa, a civil liberties advocacy group. “Many Iowans were depending on the outcome of the case today, and we are celebrating the preservation of our freedom, health and safety.” Chris Schandevel, senior counsel for Alliance Defending Freedom, which represented Gov. Kim Reynolds of Iowa in the case, said, “Iowans will surely be disappointed by today’s result, and rightly so.” He added, “It’s time for the Legislature to act — once again — to protect life.” Background The case revolved around a law signed in 2018 by Ms. Reynolds, a Republican, four years before the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the national right to abortion that was codified in the Roe v. Wade decision. Iowa’s 2018 law was blocked by a district judge, who cited an Iowa Supreme Court decision holding that the State Constitution provided a fundamental right to abortion — a decision that was later reversed. In light of that and the end of Roe, Ms. Reynolds asked the district court to lift its permanent injunction against enforcing the 2018 law. But the district court said no, setting the stage for the Iowa Supreme Court to hear the case. The higher court, whose members are all Republican appointees, deadlocked 3-3 on Friday, letting the lower court’s injunction stand. In a sharply worded opinion, the three justices who opposed lifting the injunction called the state’s request “a poor vehicle” to overrule the district court, writing, “Nothing like this case has come up in Iowa’s legal history before or is likely to come up again.” Protesters outside the Emma Goldman Clinic in Iowa City last June. What’s Next in the Nation State constitutions have become key arbiters in the nation’s state-by-state abortion battles. In the states that have enacted bans, abortion rights lawyers have argued that the bans are unconstitutional under state guarantees of privacy, health, liberty or family planning. The state Supreme Courts that have already ruled in 2023 have split on the issue: South Carolina’s ruled that abortion was included in its constitutional protections; North Dakota’s and Oklahoma’s found that their state Constitutions protected the right in some situations; Idaho’s ruled that its Constitution did not protect abortion. As of June 9, 40 cases have been filed challenging abortion bans in 22 states; 29 remain pending at either the trial or appellate levels, including cases in Indiana, Georgia and Florida, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. What’s Next in Iowa The deadlocked vote means that this case is over, but no precedent has been set. The governor could call a special session of the Legislature to enact a new law — as happened last month in South Carolina — or push for a state constitutional amendment. Two weeks after oral arguments were presented in the case in April, Ms. Reynolds underscored her determination to continue pushing to restrict abortion. “The overturning of Roe v. Wade last year was just the beginning, and since then we’ve seen some in our movement concede ground to abortion extremists,” the governor said in a recorded message to the Iowa Faith and Freedom Coalition. “Not in Iowa, and not on my watch.”






Article: 49
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Democrats, No Longer Squeamish on Abortion, Lean Into Searing Personal Ads
Author:  Rebecca Davis O’Brien and Nick Corasaniti
Publication_Date: Nov. 8, 2023
Article_Content: Graphic details and shock value used to characterize Republican political ads on abortion. But Democrats ran explicit, visceral ads ahead of Tuesday’s elections, and it paid off. On Tuesday, Ohio voters resoundingly approved a ballot measure enshrining a right to abortion in the State Constitution. In the days before Tuesday’s election, voters across Ohio heard a stark warning in an ad that blanketed the airwaves. “She could be your neighbor, or niece, your sister or daughter,” the ad said, “But if she is raped and gets pregnant, a law in Ohio would force her to have the child.” In Kentucky, a young woman named Hadley spoke directly to voters in an ad from Gov. Andy Beshear’s campaign. “I was raped by my stepfather after years of sexual abuse,” she said. “I was 12. Anyone who believes there should be no exceptions for rape and incest could never understand what it’s like to stand in my shoes.” Deeply personal and explicit, the ads signaled a new tone in Democrats’ messaging on abortion rights, one that confronts head-on the consequences of strict anti-abortion laws. Historically, it has been Republicans who used dire warnings and shock value in advertising to make their case on the issue — graphic images of bloody fetuses, medically unsubstantiated claims of fetal pain, charged accusations of infanticide, and testimony from women who said they regretted their abortions. At the same time, many Democrats for years treaded carefully around the topic. Some, including President Biden, avoided even using the term “abortion,” casting their views broadly as a matter of women’s rights. But the Supreme Court’s ruling last year in Dobbs v. Jackson, despite being a resounding legal and policy victory for Republicans, has had the paradoxical effect of galvanizing long-held, broad public support for abortion rights. And because the issue has now been forced to the states, that public sentiment is now on the local ballot, and it is Democrats who have fear — and momentum — on their side. Since the Dobbs ruling, Democrats have prevailed in a series of statewide elections, including in Ohio, Kentucky and Virginia on Tuesday, by making abortion access a centerpiece of their messaging, even when it wasn’t explicitly on the ballot. Literature at a “Students for Life” table to encourage people to vote “No” on the Ohio abortion measure was available at Otterbein University in Westerville.  Abortion opponents in Ohio spent heavily to defeat the ballot measure, but came up short despite the state’s conservative lean. “There absolutely has been a shift, and it’s not that the way we talked about it before was bad by any means,” said Angela Kuefler, a partner at Global Strategy Group, a political firm that mostly aligns with Democrats and that worked on liberal victories for abortion in ballot measures on Tuesday in Ohio and last year in Kansas. She added, “It’s more that since Dobbs, we have discovered that part of the way to make this feel more visceral and real for people, and to get them to really understand the impact this decision has on voters, is to tell stories.” Across the country, Democrats have spent more than $74 million on ads about abortion rights in 2023, compared with $16 million for Republicans, according to data from AdImpact, a media tracking firm. In places with competitive statewide elections, like the Kentucky governor’s race, the disparity was even starker: Democrats spent $1.3 million since September, while Republicans have not aired a single ad on the subject since early August, according to AdImpact. In Virginia, Democrats spent $16.7 million on ads about abortion — by far the top issue by spending — while Republicans spent one-tenth of that, the AdImpact analysis shows. Republican leaders and strategists have sounded the alarm in recent months about the need for the party to take a more nuanced, moderate stance on abortion, and to improve its messaging or risk losing more elections. Last month, at a party gathering in Dallas, Ronna McDaniel, the chairwoman of the Republican National Committee, played the Kentucky ad with the young woman named Hadley to a group of more than 100 donors. It was meant to serve as an example of how Republicans had been caught flat-footed on the abortion issue and were losing the ad wars, according to two people who were present and insisted on anonymity to describe the closed-door meeting. In an emailed statement, Ms. McDaniel said, “Since the Dobbs decision, I have been talking to candidates and campaigns about how we can’t let Democrats spend millions of dollars defining us on this issue without a response.” She added, “Republicans have to invest in resources to fight back and put Democrats on defense.” Kellyanne Conway, a Republican pollster and political adviser, said that Democrats now had  “first-person testimonials that shock the conscience.” “The pro-life movement is like the dog that caught the car,” she said, adding that Republicans must sharpen their message and spend “real money” to put Democrats on their heels. “If Kansas was the smoke alarm, Ohio was the five-alarm fire,” said Barrett Marson, a Republican political adviser in Arizona, who said the issue was a natural target for Democratic ads. “This is such a personal issue, that it is easy to pull at the heartstrings of your everyday, average, low-information voter.” The #MeToo movement, which set off its own wave of political advertisements that detailed sexual assaults, provided an early road map of how Democrats could talk about sensitive, previously taboo issues. A still image of an ad from Gov. Andy Beshear of Kentucky, showing a young woman named Hadley who described being raped by her stepfather. Text on the screen refers to Mr. Beshear’s opponent, saying, “Daniel Cameron: No exceptions for rape or incest.”  In Kentucky, a young woman named Hadley spoke directly to voters in an ad from Gov. Andy Beshear’s campaign. “I was raped by my stepfather after years of sexual abuse,” she said. “I was 12. Anyone who believes there should be no exceptions for rape and incest could never understand what it’s like to stand in my shoes.” Perhaps nowhere was the Republican concern about losing the political debate on abortion more apparent than Virginia, where Gov. Glenn Youngkin had been pushing for a 15-week ban. The abortion ad with the most money behind it in Virginia was from Mr. Youngkin’s political committee, Spirit of Virginia, trying to paint Democrats’ message as “disinformation politics at its worst.” “Here’s the truth: There is no ban,” a narrator says in the ad. “Virginia Republicans support a reasonable 15-week limit with exceptions for rape, incest and life of the mother.” Yet while the ad was backed by more than $500,000 over the final week of the election, Democrats still vastly outspent Republicans on the issue, running multiple ads that told the stories of women facing life-or-death decisions, of survivors of sexual assault and of medical professionals denouncing abortion restrictions. In Kentucky, Daniel Cameron, the Republican candidate for governor, ignored the issue entirely on the airwaves in the general election, while Mr. Beshear made it central to his closing message. One ad featured Erin White, a local county prosecutor, calling Mr. Cameron’s position on abortion — he initially supported an absolute ban, then said later that he would support one with exceptions — “an insult to the injury these survivors have made it through.” Another featured a family who was forced to terminate a pregnancy because their unborn baby could not develop a brain. Groups pushing to protect and expand abortion access commended Mr. Beshear’s campaign for its focus on the issue and for winning in a deeply red state, but cautioned against focusing too heavily on extreme exception cases.“When we focus on these really horrific, dire, exceptional stories, they have that power to really disgust, recoil, upset people and really crystallize why something seems so inane, but it also tends to lead to policy outcomes that focus on the exception,” said Mini Timmaraju, the president of Reproductive Freedom for All, formerly known as NARAL. “And that’s something that we should be mindful of as we try to advance the broadest range of reproductive freedom possible.” A correction was made on Nov. 8, 2023: An earlier version of this article misspelled the name of a young woman in an ad for Gov. Andy Beshear of Kentucky. It is Hadley, not Haley.






Article: 50
News_Outlet: NYT
Title: Indiana Reprimands Doctor Who Provided Abortion to 10-Year-Old Rape Victim
Author: Ava Sasani
Publication_Date: Published May 26, 2023 Updated May 28, 2023
Article_Content: Dr. Caitlin Bernard violated the privacy of her young patient by discussing the girl’s case with a reporter, the state’s medical board ruled. Dr. Caitlin Bernard, an obstetrician-gynecologist practicing in Indiana, provided an abortion to a ten-year-old rape victim last year. An Indiana doctor who provided an abortion to a 10-year-old rape victim last year violated her young patient’s privacy by discussing the case with a reporter, the state’s medical board ruled Thursday night. Dr. Caitlin Bernard, an Indianapolis obstetrician-gynecologist, catapulted into the national spotlight last year after she provided an abortion for an Ohio girl soon after the Supreme Court decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, which left states free to severely restrict or outlaw abortion. The state’s medical board voted to issue Dr. Bernard a letter of reprimand and a fine of $3,000. But it decided against stiffer penalties, which could have included suspension or probation, instead deciding that Dr. Bernard is fit to return to her practice. The board also cleared her of other allegations that she failed to appropriately report the girl’s rape to authorities. The decision was the culmination of a yearlong legal pursuit of Dr. Bernard by the state’s attorney general, Todd Rokita, a Republican who opposes abortion. The Ohio girl had traveled to Indiana for the procedure after her home state enacted a ban on most abortions after six weeks of pregnancy. Dr. Bernard told a reporter for The Indianapolis Star about the case during an abortion rights rally. She didn’t name the patient, but the case quickly became a flash point in the early, heated days of debate after the Supreme Court ruling, catching the attention of President Biden and turning conservative attention and ire toward Dr. Bernard. “I don’t think she intended for this to go viral,” said Dr. John Strobel, the president of the board, calling Dr. Bernard a “good doctor.” “But I do think we as physicians need to be more careful in this situation,” he said. Mr. Rokita, who had filed the complaints against Dr. Bernard with the medical board, praised the outcome. “This case was about patient privacy and the trust between the doctor and the patient that was broken,” Mr. Rokita said in a statement late Thursday. “What if it was your child or your patient or your sibling who was going through a sensitive medical crisis, and the doctor, who you thought was on your side, ran to the press for political reasons?” Dr. Bernard has criticized Mr. Rokita for turning the case into a “political stunt.” During the hearing, which stretched for more than 15 hours, ending just before midnight, Dr. Bernard said that her own comments did not reveal the patient’s protected health information. Rather, Dr. Bernard said, it was the fierce political battle that followed. Some conservatives doubted her story and drove a demand to confirm it. Eventually, the man accused of raping the girl appeared in court and was linked to her case. Dr. Bernard, who has publicly advocated for abortion rights, said she had an ethical obligation to educate the public about urgent matters of public health, especially questions about reproductive health — her area of expertise. Last July, after Indiana scheduled a special legislative session on abortion, Dr. Bernard was concerned that lawmakers in her home state would pass strict restrictions on abortion access similar to the Ohio law that forced her 10-year-old patient to cross state lines. Indiana passed legislation banning most abortions, with narrow exceptions for rape and incest. That law is on hold pending a legal challenge. Abortion is currently legal in Indiana up to 22 weeks. Dr. Bernard said she wanted to highlight the potential consequences of laws restricting abortion access, and “did not anticipate” how much the public would focus on the Ohio girl’s case. “I think it’s incredibly important for people to understand the real-word impacts of the laws of this country,” she said. Dr. Peter Schwartz, a Pennsylvania OB-GYN and chair of the American Medical Association’s Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs, supported Dr. Bernard’s decision to speak out about the Ohio patient. Dr. Schwartz said Dr. Bernard had an “affirmative obligation to speak out” about issues of reproductive health, noting that she is one of just two doctors in Indiana with expertise in complicated obstetric cases like second-trimester abortions. Attorneys on both sides of the hearing called experts on medical confidentiality to understand if Dr. Bernard violated guidelines of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, known as HIPAA, which governs the protection of patient privacy. Dr. Bernard’s employer, Indiana University Health, found that she did not violate HIPAA rules because the patient was not identifiable based on the information that Dr. Bernard had shared publicly. “The cause and effect that happened here was not: ‘Dr. Bernard’s story leads to the patient having her protected information shared,’” said Alice Morical, the doctor’s attorney. But members of the medical board, made up of six doctors and one attorney — all appointed by the governor — decided that, taken together, the details Dr. Bernard provided about the patient — including her age, her rape, her home state and her abortion — qualified as identifying information. “Dr. Bernard is a skilled and competent doctor, and I would submit that she is exactly the doctor that people would want their children to see under these circumstances,” said Ms. Morical.




