Article: 1
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Tommy Tuberville Backs Down in Fight Over Military Promotions Alabama senator had blocked officers from advancing in protest of Pentagon’s abortion policy
Author: Lindsay Wise and Nancy A. Youssef
Publication_Date: Updated Dec. 5, 2023 5:42 pm ET
Article_Content: Alabama Sen. Tommy Tuberville lost the support of some of his fellow Republicans over his hold on military promotions. WASHINGTON—Sen. Tommy Tuberville ended his monthslong hold on nearly all military promotions, clearing the way for hundreds of officers to move forward immediately while still demanding individual votes for about a dozen four-star generals and admirals. Since February, the Alabama Republican had blocked the Senate from fast-tracking military promotions, as is traditionally done, unless the Pentagon ended its policy of allowing troops time off and travel funds for reproductive healthcare, including abortion. “I’m not going to hold the promotions of these people any longer,” he told reporters Tuesday. “We fought hard. We did the right thing for the unborn and for our military, fighting back against executive overreach and an abortion policy.” His reversal resolved an impasse that the Pentagon has said has affected military readiness amid threats from Russia, China and a continuing war in Israel. Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.) quickly moved through the several hundred promotions by unanimous consent and said he planned to hold votes on the exempted officers soon. “Today hundreds—hundreds – of military families across the country can breathe a sigh of relief,” he said. “I am glad this pointless and gravely damaging ordeal has finally, finally ended.” Tuberville’s holds had drawn sharp criticism for months from Democrats, and he had lost the support of some of his fellow Republicans, who tried various ways to move the promotions forward and bypass rules that allow one senator to exert considerable sway over the process. A group of Senate Republicans, most with military backgrounds, confronted Tuberville on the floor last month, pleading with him to lift his holds. They said that ending the holds had taken on a new urgency in recent weeks because of events overseas and escalating threats to national security. As of Nov. 27, 451 generals and admirals have been blocked from speedy Senate confirmation because of Tuberville’s holds, which began in February. Of those, 11 are four-star admirals or generals, a U.S. defense official said.  “Certainly we’re encouraged by the news,” said Air Force Brig. Gen. Pat Ryder, a Pentagon spokesman. Among the top officers who would need to be confirmed individually are Adm. Samuel J. Paparo, Jr., who is slated to lead U.S. Indo-Pacific Command, responsible for all U.S. military operations in that region; Air Force Lt. Gen. Timothy D. Haugh, who has been nominated to lead Cyber Command; and Air Force Lt. Gen. Gregory M. Guillot, who, if confirmed, would command U.S. Northern Command, responsible for military operations over North America. Sen. Joni Ernst and other fellow Republicans recently stepped up their pressure on Tuberville to drop at least some of his holds, or shift to holding civilian appointees responsible for policy. Tuberville had said that his hold didn’t prevent the Democratic-controlled Senate from confirming each nominee’s promotion separately, but Democrats and others pointed out that doing so would occupy hundreds of hours of floor time. Critics also underscored that Tuberville was forcing career military officers—who don’t make policy—to pay the price for decisions made by administration officials, and that his ire would be better directed at them.  “Remember, we’re against the Biden abortion travel policy, but why are we punishing people who have nothing to do with the dispute, and if they get confirmed, can’t fix it?” said Sen. Dan Sullivan (R., Alaska). “No one has had an answer to that question, because there’s no answer. You’re gonna punish Silver Star recipients, Purple Heart recipients?” During the impasse, military officers selected for promotion couldn’t move to new positions until they were confirmed, making it difficult to schedule moves or make any long-term plans. Some officers held two jobs as vacancies remained open.  “I do want to stress that these men and women—and their families—have been going through this for 10 months,” Sen. Joni Ernst (R., Iowa) told reporters ahead of Tuberville’s announcement. “They have not known what the rest of their life is going to look like for the past 10 months.” With the signoff for all but the nominated four-stars, the Senate is now likely to approve those 11 officers without the process becoming too time consuming. Marine Commandant Gen. Eric Smith, who had been serving as the Marine commandant as well as the corps’ No. 2 officer, went into cardiac arrest in October while on a run near his home. Some Republican senators backed Tuberville, while others—including Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.)—had said they shared his disapproval of the Pentagon policy, but condemned Tuberville’s holds as counterproductive. They also warned that such holds would encourage Democrats to retaliate when they were in the minority. As Republicans struggled to find an exit ramp for Tuberville, Senate Democrats initiated a rare process to advance the promotions in a large group through a standing order resolution, a temporary rules change that would require 60 votes. Schumer had endorsed the effort, but it was unknown whether it could have gotten the nine Republican votes needed to advance in the 51-49 Senate. In recent weeks, amid the Israel-Hamas conflict, some Senate Republicans’ patience with Tuberville ran out. The war in Gaza has underscored the need for U.S. military readiness as thousands of troops have been scrambled to the region. A health incident also reinforced the importance of filling military jobs. Marine Commandant Gen. Eric Smith went into cardiac arrest in October while on a run near his home on Capitol Hill. Smith had been serving as the Marine commandant, but also the Corps’ No. 2 officer. He had said he was working 18-hour days doing the top two jobs, which was “not sustainable.” Smith is recuperating, but isn’t expected to return to office soon.  Fellow Republicans then stepped up their pressure. Over a period of four hours, GOP Sens. Ernst, Sullivan, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Todd Young of Indiana and Mitt Romney of Utah forced Tuberville to reject 61 promotions—one by one. Their public push followed months of private efforts to persuade Tuberville to drop at least some of his holds, or shift to holding civilian appointees responsible for policy, instead of blocking the promotions of nonpolitical career military officers. The Senate GOP caucus then met privately in November with Tuberville to seek a way out of the impasse, but they emerged hours later with no solution in sight. Tuberville said recently that his Republican colleagues’ pressure campaign on the floor didn’t bother him. He likened it to a family argument. “Listen, I’ve been under fire all my life in my former job,” he said, referring to his years as a college football coach. “You know, you gotta believe in what you believe in.” A survey conducted by the Reagan Institute between Oct. 27 and Nov. 5 asked whether it was appropriate for “a senator to block votes on these nominees in order to protest Defense Department policies unrelated to warfighting.” Of the 2,506 Americans surveyed, 63% described the block as inappropriate, while 22% approved. Another 15% were undecided.




Article: 2
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: The 2024 Election Rematch That Americans Dread Looks Likely
Author:  Ken Thomas, Catherine Lucey, and John McCormick
Publication_Date: Updated Nov. 5, 2023 11:38 am ET
Article_Content: A year before the 2024 election, a divided nation is stuck in a political loop: President Trump’s weaknesses helped deliver President Biden to the White House, and now the incumbent’s vulnerabilities could lead his predecessor to a comeback.

Biden, the nation’s oldest president at age 80, is poised to reclaim the party’s nomination, yet he has been dogged with questions about his age, frustration over his handling of the economy and anxiety about two wars. Trump, 77, has a comfortable lead as he seeks the Republican nomination for a third time, even as many moderate and independent voters are repelled by his repeated efforts to overturn the 2020 elections results and the many criminal indictments he faces.

The two are likely headed for a general election rematch that will unfold against a backdrop of discontent, pitting two unpopular candidates against each other on inflation, abortion and America’s role in an unstable world. Given the narrowly divided electorate, the outcome will hinge on a small slice of voters spread across a half dozen or so states, with the possibility of multiple independent or third-party candidates scrambling the results. 

Rep. Don Bacon, a Nebraska Republican who represents a closely divided Omaha-based district, said he believed that in 2020, “a lot of people didn’t vote for Joe Biden, they voted for Donald Trump or against Donald Trump.”

This time around, he said, “I think the same issues that challenged Trump in our district are still there. People don’t like the name-calling, they want order.” But he added: “The difference this time is people are unhappy with Joe Biden’s performance.”

Biden's job approval since taking office
Source: Gallup

A poll released this past week from Quinnipiac University showed the two men essentially tied in a hypothetical matchup, with 47% of registered voters supporting Biden and 46% backing Trump. The perennial question is where independent voters, who are evenly split in the poll, land.

A series of polls released Sunday by the New York Times and Siena College showed Biden trailing Trump among registered voters in five of the six swing states they surveyed. The polls found voters said, by a wide margin, that Trump’s policies as president helped them more than Biden’s did, and that majorities in every demographic group thought Biden was “too old” to be president.

The race would be one for the history books—the first rematch of major party nominees since the 1950s. If Biden and Trump again lead their party’s tickets, the contest would feature the nation’s oldest president against the nation’s second-oldest president. If Trump prevails, he would become the first former president to reclaim the White House since Grover Cleveland in 1892. 

Many say this is a sequel they could do without. 

“I feel very sad that that’s the best we can do,” said Cindy Roth, 64, a retired Republican from Morton, Pa., a state won by Trump in 2016 and Biden in 2020. “I would love to see younger people.” 

Trump’s 2020 fixation

Even as he dominates the Republican field, Trump faces a number of hurdles as he looks to the general election. He continues to claim falsely that the 2020 election was stolen from him—assertions he made to his supporters leading up to the attack on the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021. 

Polls show a majority of Republicans don’t view Biden’s election as legitimate, raising the prospect that the 2024 results could again be disputed. Yet polls and the results of the 2022 midterm elections—in which several high-profile Trump-backed candidates lost—indicate that many swing voters are tired of his claims about 2020.

“We’ve never had an election like this. We had the 2020 election and it never ended,” said Democratic pollster Jeff Horwitt. “Usually the loser of the election goes away. That has never happened. Usually their supporters take some time and move on. That has never happened.” 

‘Is your opinion of Donald Trump favorable, unfavorable or haven't you heard enough about​him?’
Source: Quinnipiac University national poll

While Trump has a massive polling lead over the GOP field, he is trying to make his nomination inevitable. The former president has been taking constant shots at his two closest competitors, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis and former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley. His team is looking to score decisive wins in early Republican contests in Iowa and New Hampshire, hoping to lock up the nomination by “Super Tuesday” in early March, when more than a dozen states will hold contests. 

DeSantis, who has heavily focused his campaign on the Jan. 15 Iowa caucuses, is expected to formally receive the endorsement of Iowa Gov. Kim Reynolds at an event in Des Moines on Monday, according to a person familiar with the matter. The endorsement was first reported by NBC News and the Des Moines Register.

Trump’s campaign responded with a statement suggesting Reynolds has “begun her retirement tour early as she clearly does not have any ambition for higher office” after the endorsement. “Her endorsement will not make any difference in this race,” the statement said.

Trump’s allies have called for all other candidates to quit and unite behind him, as a show of party support against his onslaught of legal problems, which include a civil fraud trial and four criminal indictments. Charges against the former president include attempting to overturn his 2020 election loss in Georgia, civil fraud in New York, his handling of classified documents in Florida and a federal trial in Washington, D.C., for election interference.

Trump will have to spend time in various courtrooms next year, away from the campaign trail, complicating his pitch to voters. For example, Trump faces a March 4 trial date—the day before Super Tuesday—in the federal case in Washington, D.C., over charges that he tried to overturn the 2020 election results. 

Trump’s advisers want to remind people about the economy during his term, which reached historic milestones for jobs, income and stock prices until the Covid-19 pandemic hit in March 2020 and sent unemployment to historic highs. While they acknowledge Trump’s court cases are a drag on his time, they think Trump has a unique ability to turn out infrequent voters.

The Trump Indictments: Analyzing His Legal and 2024 Campaign Strategy
Former President Donald Trump is facing four separate indictments at both state and federal levels. WSJ breaks down each of the indictments and what they mean for his 2024 presidential campaign. 
Nevada-based GOP strategist Zachary Moyle said many voters would see a rematch between Biden and Trump as one forcing them to pick “the lesser of two evils” and thus creating a turnout challenge for both parties.

Trump has also sought to target Biden’s age and fitness for office, mocking his walk and speaking style.  

Charles Franklin, director of a state and national poll conducted by Marquette Law School in Milwaukee, said there has been a very deliberate—and effective—messaging strategy from Republicans almost from the moment Biden was elected that he’s too old for the job. “Every poll I’ve done that asks about age finds twice as many people saying Biden is too old than saying Trump is too old,” he said.

Biden’s age problem

Biden will enter the general election with the backing of party leaders, but as surveys show a majority of voters, including large numbers of Democrats, urging him not to seek re-election. His age and calls for a new generation of leadership are at the heart of a long-shot primary challenge by Rep. Dean Phillips (D., Minn.), who filed for the New Hampshire ballot late last month.

Biden will need to reassemble the diverse coalition of voters that elected him in 2020 and make a proactive case that his first-term agenda has led the nation out of the Covid-19 pandemic into a strong economy. 

Biden officials contend that the eventual Republican nominee will be forced to take unpopular positions on taxes, abortion, Social Security and Medicare in order to placate the party’s MAGA base. In particular, abortion access, which helped power Democratic victories in 2022 following the Supreme Court decision eliminating a constitutional right to abortion, could again prove energizing for Democrats and some women. 

“No matter who emerges from the field, the toxicity of these positions will be difficult to overcome with the voters who will decide this election,” wrote Julie Chavez Rodriguez, Biden’s campaign manager, in a memo released Thursday. 

Biden and Trump are expected to fight for the same battleground states that decided the 2020 election: Arizona, Michigan, Georgia, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, all of which were won by Trump in 2016 and Biden in 2020. North Carolina and Nevada also are seen as competitive by both parties. 

Biden and his allies started advertising far earlier than President Obama did when he was running for re-election in 2012, according to ad tracker AdImpact. Democrats started in April of this year, roughly nine months earlier than in the 2012 cycle, and their ads have so far played most frequently in Pennsylvania, Arizona and Georgia.

Biden’s team believes he will ultimately get credit for a string of legislative accomplishments, including a $1 trillion infrastructure measure and new laws promoting the development of semiconductors and climate projects, as well as the backing of voters who support abortion access. They argue concerns about Biden’s age will fade when voters are faced with a direct choice, and have highlighted Trump’s campaign gaffes, such as when he recently confused Sioux City, Iowa, with Sioux Falls, S.D. 

Both sides acknowledge that voters’ mood on the economy will play a major role. While economic growth surged over the summer and hiring shot up in September, surveys show the public remains pessimistic about the current economic direction, which is likely due to ongoing pains of inflation or other factors. 

“We recognize that people right now are anxious about the economy despite the good [economic] numbers from a macro perspective,” said Rep. Ro Khanna (D., Calif.). “To me, it has to be a choice election, not a ratification election.”

Some Democrats are concerned that the White House effort to promote “Bidenomics” as a shorthand for his economic accomplishments has been unpersuasive, but Biden has stuck with it. 

A third-party opening?

The possibilities of independent or third-party challenges, which were minimal in 2020, could make the outcomes in battleground states difficult to predict and provide an outlet for disaffected voters. Robert F. Kennedy Jr., the nephew of former President John F. Kennedy, and academic Cornel West, are both running as independents, though they will have to expend considerable time and money to make ballots across the country. No Labels, a centrist group, also may launch a unity presidential ticket. And the Green and Libertarian parties, which captured hundreds of thousands of votes in 2016 battleground states, are expected to field nominees.

Biden and Trump accounted for more than 98% of the popular vote in 2020, depriving third-party challenges of much support. But in 2016, when Trump defeated Hillary Clinton, the two major-party candidates accounted for just less than 95%.

In a hypothetical four-way matchup, the Quinnipiac poll showed Biden received support from 36% of registered voters, Trump got 35%, Kennedy had 19% and West 6%. Support for third-party candidates often declines as elections draw closer and major party nominees are set. 

“I think the move by Cornel West and Kennedy to run as independents is going to throw some wild cards in there,” said Republican pollster Greg Strimple.






Article: 3
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Support for Abortion Access Is Near Record, Poll Finds
Author: Julie Wernau  
Publication_Date: Nov. 20, 2023 9:00 am ET
Article_Content: Some 55% of respondents say it should be possible for a pregnant woman to obtain a legal abortion if she wants it for any reason. Republican Santana De’LaBay disagrees with her party’s stance on broad abortion restrictions. Santana De’LaBay, a 29-year-old Republican with six children, thinks her party is wrong to back broad abortion restrictions. Motherhood has shown her that the decision to have a child is financially, medically and emotionally complex—and not a choice the government should impede.

“Every woman has different experiences and health complications,” said De’LaBay, a licensed practical nurse in Cincinnati. “There’s a whole lot of variables that can come up.”

Share of respondents who say "yes" when​asked if a pregnant woman should be able​to obtain a legal abortion if she wants one​for any reason, by partisan affiliation
Source: WSJ/NORC poll of 1,163 registered voters​conducted Oct. 19-24; margin of error: +/– 4.0 pct. pts.​(2023); WSJ/NORC polling (2022). Data prior to 2022​is from NORC's General Social Survey.

New results from a Wall Street Journal-NORC poll show Americans’ support for abortion access is at one of the highest levels on record since nonpartisan researchers began tracking it in the 1970s. Some 55% of respondents say it should be possible for a pregnant woman to obtain a legal abortion if she wants it for any reason. 

The poll, conducted for the Journal by NORC at the University of Chicago, surveyed 1,163 registered voters from Oct. 19-24. 

Since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade and ended the constitutional right to the procedure, abortion-rights groups have notched seven consecutive victories in state ballot initiatives. They include an Ohio measure earlier this month to protect abortion under the state constitution. Behind these successes is a decadeslong shift among Americans in support of access to the procedure.

Democrats and independent voters—whose support of abortion rights was roughly in line with that of Republicans up until the 1990s—now back access to the procedure by greater margins. About 77% of Democrats in the new poll say they support access to abortion for any reason, up from 52% in 2016. Among Republicans, that share is one-third. 

Some Republican voters who generally oppose abortion rights don’t want to give state lawmakers the chance to rewrite the rules, a position they see as in keeping with conservative support for limiting government intervention. 

Please say whether or not you think it should be possible for a pregnant woman to obtain a legal abortion if…
‘Yes’ responses ▼3 pct. pts. since 1973 Woman’s health is endangered ▲2 pct. pts. Became pregnant from rape or incest ▼4 pct. pts. Strong chance of serious defect in the baby ▲8 pct. pts. Family cannot afford another child ▲18 pct. pts. since 1977* Woman wants it for any reason Source: WSJ/NORC poll of 1,163 registered voters conducted Oct. 19-24; margin of error: +/– 4.0 pct. pts. (2023); WSJ/NORC polling (2022). Data prior to 2022 is from NORC's General Social Survey. Many voters have nuanced views, including backing restrictions later in pregnancy and exceptions for difficult circumstances, that they say aren’t well captured by current legislative proposals. Nearly nine in 10 poll respondents support abortion access in the event of rape or incest, or when a woman’s health is seriously endangered by the pregnancy. Barbara Weigand, 80, a Democratic-leaning voter in Hartville, Ohio, struggled with how to vote on her state’s ballot measure.  Barbara Weigand, a Democratic-leaning voter, struggled with how to vote on Ohio’s ballot measure.  She believes that women should be able to manage their own health and favored abortion access for most of her life. But since a religious awakening in her 60s, she now believes that God is in every human life. Typically she votes Democrat because she is aligned with the party’s stance on adding more gun laws and providing financial security for seniors. But the ballot measure wasn’t asking for her take on those issues. “I ultimately voted against the issue because I couldn’t let God down,” she said. For Scott Sternlieb, 66, a Republican-leaning retired tractor-trailer driver in rural Show Low, Ariz., abortion isn’t a black and white issue. His personal view is that a limit of 15 weeks makes sense but not in all cases.

“I don’t like abortion period,” he said. “But I do understand that in a lot of cases, it’s gotta be OK. It has to be. If it’s incest, it’s rape, if it’s a medical issue—how can you say no?”

He said abortion is near the bottom of his priority list as a voter. Despite his views, his distrust of the government makes him inclined to tell everyone to stay out of it and just let the woman decide. His bigger concern, he said, is that the Democrats are using the abortion issue to win over voters who would otherwise vote against them.

Abortion wasn’t always a politically polarized issue, according to data from NORC’s General Social Survey, a large survey run by social scientists that has tracked American attitudes since the early 1970s. Historically, Americans’ views on abortion on both sides of the aisle swung back and forth, with Democrats sometimes more in favor of abortion access and sometimes Republicans. 

Charise Chism says the GOP’s focus on abortion has become a distraction from more pressing issues.
The partisan split on the issue emerged in the 1990s, in tandem with a change in the composition of each party. Conservatives increasingly shifted into the Republican Party and liberals into the Democratic Party, so that each party is now more ideologically uniform. Antiabortion policies helped the GOP draw in Christian conservative voters who broadened its coalition, while a more consistent abortion-rights stance helped Democrats win over progressive voters.

Charise Chism used to consider herself strongly Republican. But the 42-year-old caretaker in Pearl, Miss., said she feels like her party’s focus on abortion has become a distraction from more pressing issues. 

“Our government is in debt and running off to more wars, and we’re like, ‘Let’s get rid of this thing we decided long ago?’” she said of the abortion debate. “I thought this was solved.”

As a Black woman, she said she doesn’t trust the government to be involved in her healthcare. Chism has a friend who is raising a child conceived by rape because she couldn’t afford to leave Mississippi to get an abortion. “It should not even be a political issue,” she said.

NORC polling shows that Americans’ attitudes about abortion vary depending on the reasons for terminating a pregnancy. Some 86% of respondents support abortion access in the event of rape or incest, and 89% support it when a woman’s health is seriously endangered by the pregnancy.

Jessica Munoz, who says she sometimes leans Democratic, can’t bring herself to vote for a candidate who is antiabortion.
“For many Americans, this is an issue that has nuance,” said Jocelyn Kiley, associate director of U.S. politics research for Pew Research Center. 

Politicians latch on to the abortion issue, she said, because for a minority of voters with the most strongly held views, it will motivate them to vote. For a long time, abortion was a strong motivator for conservative religious voters. Since the overturning of Roe v. Wade last year, she said, abortion has become a strong motivator for Democratic voters.

Jessica Munoz, a 33-year-old Chicagoan who said she sometimes leans Democratic, voted for President Biden because she thought that his affiliation with former President Barack Obama would make him a strong leader. She has been unhappy with Biden’s presidency, particularly his policies at the border that she said have unleashed thousands of migrants in her city. 

But she can’t bring herself to vote for a candidate who is antiabortion. Years spent working as a nurse with young children housed in the psychiatric unit of a local hospital helped shape her view that, when people don’t have access to abortion, women who shouldn’t become mothers have children who suffer.

“A lot of women back then fought for what we have now. We don’t want history to repeat,” she said.

Rick Moore, a strong Republican voter, believes the only person who should make the decision about whether a baby is born is God.  
Kelvin Vasquez, 36, a strongly Republican father of two in New York City, said that if people have children and can’t afford it, they start relying on the government to make ends meet. “Five years ago, I filled up my tank with $25,” he said. “Now it’s like $40 or $50.”

Vasquez isn’t in favor of late-term abortions and said he thinks women should have to see a psychologist before making the decision to abort a child. But, overall, he said, the economy can’t afford to be forcing women to have children.

Rick Moore, 69, a strong Republican voter in Las Vegas, said he isn’t sure the Republican Party is making the right decision to keep pushing the abortion issue after its win on that front at the Supreme Court. “Don’t poke the bear,” he said. He believes the only person who should make the decision about whether a baby is born is God. 

“If that was on the ballot, that we’re going to end abortion—I’d be there in a heartbeat,” he said.







Article: 4
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: How Democrats Are Leveraging Abortion Rights to Win in 2024
Author: Laura Kusisto and Jimmy Vielkind
Publication_Date: Nov. 10, 2023 9:00 pm ET
Article_Content: Ohio’s passage of a measure to protect abortion under the state constitution gave abortion-rights groups seven straight victories in ballot initiatives since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. Fresh off another round of victories in Tuesday’s elections, abortion-rights activists are seeking to put the issue on the ballot in numerous states in 2024, a wild card that could influence next year’s campaigns for the White House and control of Congress. When Ohio voters this week passed a measure to protect abortion under the state constitution, it gave abortion-rights groups seven consecutive victories in ballot initiatives since the Supreme Court last year eliminated a constitutional right to the procedure. Those successes have come in politically diverse states, from Kansas and Kentucky to Michigan and California. Now, well-funded and organized efforts are under way to place abortion initiatives on the ballot in Arizona, which is poised to figure heavily in next year’s presidential election, and Florida. There are also nascent efforts to push referendums in states such as Colorado, Nebraska and Nevada. Then there is New York, where voters will consider an equal-rights amendment to the state constitution that includes protections for abortion access. The state, however, already has broad abortion rights and it isn’t clear if the measure will galvanize voters as it has elsewhere. New York Democrats hope the referendum will boost them after a poor showing in 2022 that arguably cost the party control of the U.S. House. How those efforts fare could color races up and down the ballot, potentially giving Democrats a weapon they have used to help energize their base and counter voter disenchantment with the economy and lack of enthusiasm for President Biden’s re-election. Republicans, for their part, have struggled to develop a winning message on abortion since the Supreme Court’s ruling. While Democrats are eager to capitalize on the issue, abortion-rights groups don’t want to overplay their hand and rush in with under-resourced efforts to tee-up new ballot initiatives they might lose. Even with momentum, initiative battles, which often require proponents to collect hundreds of thousands of signatures from registered voters to place an issue on the ballot, take an enormous investment of time and money, and competition for political fundraising and voter attention will be fierce in 2024. Recent ballot campaigns in some states have cost upward of $40 million. “I think that would be a real misread of the opportunity to try to do it everywhere. That’s a big mistake,” said Deirdre Schifeling, chief political and advocacy officer for the American Civil Liberties Union.  Advocacy groups are pinning many of their ballot-initiative hopes for 2024 on Arizona. That state has some nearly ideal conditions for abortion-rights groups: restrictive abortion laws on the books, a sympathetic governor and attorney general and a relatively straightforward process for getting a measure on the ballot. The state also has an electorate receptive to messages about personal freedom that have proven to be a winning strategy elsewhere. “When you can put it in the context of freedoms, then you can build big winning coalitions,” said Tory Gavito, president of Way to Win, a nonprofit that helps get Democratic candidates elected. “The ballot measures are a part of that strategy.”  Protesters marched near downtown Phoenix in June 2022 after the Supreme Court eliminated the constitutional right to an abortion. Arizona state law requires about 384,000 signatures to place an initiative before voters. Organizations leading the campaign are hoping to gather double that number to help steel themselves for a potential legal challenge by opponents. Those signatures must be submitted to the secretary of state by next summer. Once a Republican bastion, Arizona has become a major political battleground over the last several cycles. Former President Donald Trump won the state in 2016 but lost it to Biden in 2020. In addition to the presidency, the state will have competitive races for the U.S. Senate, House and the state legislature next year. If the abortion measure is on the ballot, it could help boost voter turnout and affect those contests. In Florida, abortion-rights groups have been working since the spring to gather signatures, and organizers say they are on track with more than half of the number they need to collect ahead of a Feb. 1 deadline. But state dynamics also illustrate how activists face challenges in placing a referendum on the ballot even when they are well-organized on an issue that appears to enjoy popular support. State Attorney General Ashley Moody, a Republican, has filed a challenge to the initiative with the Florida Supreme Court, arguing its language is vague and confusing. Florida Attorney General Ashley Moody, a Republican, has filed a challenge to an initiative effort with the state supreme court. Abortion proponents “have proposed an amendment to the Florida Constitution using a misleading ballot summary to trick voters into freezing in place a legal framework that conceals the amendment’s potentially sweeping legal effects,” Moody wrote in a legal brief filed last month. If the court, which is filled with Republican appointees, agrees, such a ruling could prevent the measure from getting on the ballot next year. In Nevada, abortion-rights groups earlier this fall filed a petition to try to place a constitutional amendment strengthening protections for abortion on the ballot. Under state law, it would also need to pass in two elections, in 2024 and 2026. Vermont, California and Michigan last year became the first states to enshrine explicit abortion protections in their state constitutions. More than a dozen states have protections for abortion in state law, according to the Guttmacher Institute, and some state courts have also interpreted their constitutions to protect a right to an abortion. So far, voters have been most motivated in states where there was a real threat that abortion could be tightly restricted. That was true in Ohio and Michigan, as well as in Kansas, where voters last year rejected a proposed state constitutional amendment to exclude protections for the procedure. A referendum in Kansas last year saw strong turnout among Democrats and independents. While California voters passed an abortion-rights amendment last year, the issue didn’t appear to have the same type of galvanizing effect or spillover impact in a state where abortion access already was robust. Republicans still won several competitive U.S. House races there. The same dynamic could play out next year in New York. The idea for the referendum there, which supporters say would make laws restricting abortions unconstitutional, germinated for years mostly among lawmakers. State legislators in July of 2022 took the first required step to putting it on the ballot. State Sen. Liz Krueger, a Manhattan Democrat who sponsored the amendment, said she purposefully chose to place the referendum on the ballot in 2024 instead of this year because turnout will be higher with a presidential election and several close races for the U.S. House on the ballot. “Voters in New York state are going to the ballot box both for this constitutional amendment but also against people who don’t support these rights,” she said. Abortion has been legal under New York law since 1970, and lawmakers in 2019 strengthened reproductive rights with a new statute. Iona University political science professor Jeanne Sheehan Zaino said other voter concerns likely would be more salient. “In New York, while you can scare people on certain things regarding their right to choose and what’s happening elsewhere, they’re not going to be as fearful of that as they are on issues of crime, security and things like inflation,” she said. Activists on both sides of the abortion divide faced off in front of a Planned Parenthood clinic in New York earlier this year.



Article: 5
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion-Rights Supporters Rack Up Victories, Putting GOP in Bind for 2024
Author: Aaron Zitner and Laura Kusisto 
Publication_Date: Updated Nov. 8, 2023 10:43 pm ET 
Article_Content: From red Ohio and Kentucky to purple Virginia and Pennsylvania, Tuesday’s results show the issue’s continued potency with voters. Voters cast ballots at a polling location in Virginia on Tuesday, where Democrats retained control of the state Senate and gained control of the House. They were disparate elections in different states—for governor, state Senate, a supreme court seat and on a constitutional amendment. But the results of off-year races on Tuesday pointed in one direction: Voters will come to the polls to defend abortion rights. In the Republican strongholds of Ohio and Kentucky, as well as politically purple Virginia and Pennsylvania, abortion-rights supporters spent millions of dollars to tell voters that GOP lawmakers couldn’t be trusted to set state abortion policy after the Supreme Court last year eliminated a right to the procedure under the U.S. Constitution. Those efforts worked, giving Democrats hopes that they can harness the issue once again in 2024 to offset voter disenchantment with the economy and President Biden, who is running for re-election with weak job-approval ratings. “Abortion is an issue that motivates and turns out Democrats, and that advantage for them is not going to fade,” said Tucker Martin, a longtime Republican political strategist in Virginia, where Democrats retained control of the state Senate and, in a substantial victory, gained control of the House. The poor results were invoked during the Republican presidential debate Wednesday night in Miami. “I’m sick of Republicans losing,” said Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis. Former United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley said the GOP needed to do a better job trying to find consensus in the abortion debate, including with supporters of abortion rights. The abortion-rights side did particularly well in the types of suburban counties that were key in determining the results of the 2016 and 2020 races and will be crucial again in 2024. And some Democrats were quick to point to Tuesday’s results as evidence that the party was in solid shape and shouldn’t fret so much about Biden’s personal unpopularity. “What if—and just hear me out for a second—the Democratic brand and Joe Biden have policies people actually like? And the way people voted last night is a reflection of both those things?” asked Jim Messina, who managed Barack Obama’s 2012 campaign, in a post on X. The results also suggested that Republicans and antiabortion groups haven’t yet found their footing on the issue, as Democrats have zeroed in on strict bans in some states to portray the other side as extreme. Tuesday’s elections underscore that whether conservatives seek to paint themselves as compromising, push for tougher restrictions or try to avoid talking about abortion altogether, they continue to struggle when the issue is an electoral focal point. The Supreme Court has some really controversial cases on its docket—including whether domestic abusers should have access to guns and whether the abortion pill should be legal. They all came from one lower court: the Fifth Circuit. WSJ explains why. In campaigning for Republican legislative candidates, Virginia GOP Gov. Glenn Youngkin had called for a ban on abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy, rather than the state’s current limit after 26 weeks—an idea that is off the table now that Democrats will control both legislative chambers. He and national antiabortion leaders had hoped Tuesday’s contests would show that Youngkin’s proposal, which they are promoting as a compromise position, would appeal to moderate voters. In Ohio, voters approved an amendment to the state constitution protecting access to the procedure until the fetus can live outside the womb, generally at about 23 weeks of pregnancy. The decision was a rebuke to Republicans in the state legislature and GOP Gov. Mike DeWine. The governor in 2019 signed a ban on abortion after about six weeks of pregnancy, which has been blocked in court for most of the past year. In Pennsylvania, Democrat Daniel McCaffery won a state Supreme Court seat, after running ads promising to defend abortion rights and voting rights. His win over Republican Carolyn Carluccio fortifies the existing Democratic majority on a court that decided important cases about voting access before the 2020 election in the nation’s biggest presidential swing state. In Kentucky, a state that former President Donald Trump won twice by more than 25 percentage points, voters re-elected Democratic Gov. Andy Beshear and rejected Republican Attorney General Daniel Cameron, who supports the state’s near-total ban on abortion. Beshear had run one of the sharpest abortion-related ads of the year, featuring a young woman who says she was raped by her stepfather at age 12. “This is to you, Daniel Cameron,’’ she says to the camera. “To tell a 12-year-old girl she must have the baby of her stepfather who raped her is unthinkable.” Cameron had at times indicated support for adding exceptions for rape and incest to the state’s abortion ban. Trey Grayson, a Republican and former Kentucky secretary of state, said Cameron’s policy shift showed that abortion had become a factor in the election, as did the fact that Beshear highlighted the issue. “In the past, Democrats didn’t talk much about abortion,” he said. Since the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade last June, abortion-rights groups have scored a string of victories in states as wide-ranging as Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan and Wisconsin. The issue also helped bolster Democratic fortunes in last year’s midterm elections in gubernatorial races in Arizona and Michigan, where abortion was a central point of division between the candidates, as well as in congressional races. Voters in Kentucky re-elected Democratic Gov. Andy Beshear. The victory in Ohio is likely to create new momentum behind efforts to put abortion rights on the ballot in 2024 in states including Arizona, Florida, Nevada and Nebraska. That could help boost turnout by Democratic voters in places that could be key battlegrounds in the presidential election and other races. The two parties will look for clues in Tuesday’s results for how abortion might affect the 2024 presidential race. The results from some states suggested that voters in upper-income suburbs outside big cities, who often lean Republican, are eager to support abortion rights. In Ohio, for example, close to 60% of voters in Delaware County, just outside Columbus, backed the constitutional amendment protecting abortion rights—substantially more than the 53% who backed Trump in 2020. Mike Madrid, a Republican political consultant based in California, said that many of these voters, particularly women, were leaving the GOP. “The tendency of college-educated, suburban Republican women to vote Democratic is now more likely than less likely,” he said. “Not all of them, but significant numbers. There is a very critical part of the Republican coalition that appears to be leaving permanently on cultural issues.” Outside Richmond, Va., a Republican senator lost her seat to a Democrat after campaigning in favor of a 15-week abortion ban. Democrats also won a competitive Senate race in the Virginia suburbs outside Washington, D.C., in which their candidate promised to prevent a rollback of abortion rights. Polling also showed that support for abortion rights crossed party lines. In Ohio, a survey of election voters, conducted for news organizations, found that about 20% of Trump voters backed the constitutional amendment. By contrast, 8% of voters who had backed Biden in 2020 opposed the amendment. While those voters may stick with their party’s nominees in the next presidential election, the survey surfaced a warning sign for the GOP: Nearly half of voters said they trusted the Democratic Party more to handle abortion, compared with 42% who trusted the GOP more. At the same time, voters trusted the Republican Party more on the economy. The challenging terrain of abortion has prompted Trump to leave his intentions unclear. He often highlights the fact that his Supreme Court nominees helped overturn Roe v. Wade, but he hasn’t endorsed a national law banning abortion at some point in pregnancy, as some antiabortion groups have pushed him to do. People cheered as they watched the results of elections in Columbus, Ohio, on Tuesday. Tom Bonier of the Democratic voter data firm TargetSmart said Tuesday’s results showed that abortion could boost Biden’s re-election effort, which has drawn muted enthusiasm from voters. Polls show overwhelmingly that voters are worried about the president’s age and effectiveness. “What you’re seeing in these limited results is that the issue of abortion has actually grown in saliency. People have had more than a year to live with the Dobbs decision,” Bonier said, referring to the Supreme Court case that overturned Roe v. Wade, “and the lived reality is more stark and more impactful than anyone had anticipated.” He said election results since the decision showed that abortion rights could motivate those Democratic voters who so far have been unengaged, while also winning over “some number of Trump voters.” Martin, the Virginia Republican, said that while abortion was a powerful issue, it might not be the most powerful by Election Day next year. “Every election is different in the hierarchy of issues that matter to voters,” he said. “When we get to the presidential election, with the world in its current state, it might be foreign policy. It might be the economy. No one can tell you what the top issue in 2024 will be.”





Article: 6
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Tuberville’s One-Man Stand Strains Senate Patience
Alabamian says blocking Pentagon nominees in protest of abortion policy is just; foes say he’s ‘100% wrong’
Author: Molly Ball
Publication_Date: Nov. 13, 2023 5:00 am ET
Article_Content: Sen. Tommy Tuberville’s crusade has earned him the enmity of many of his colleagues and left him increasingly isolated. PHOTO: EVELYN HOCKSTEIN/REUTERS
If anyone in Washington expects Sen. Tommy Tuberville to back down, he is here to dispel that idea. 

“I hate to hold people hostage like this,” the Alabama Republican says, sitting in a barren anteroom of his Capitol Hill office suite. “They have nothing to do with this. But what do you do? Do you fight for the Constitution?” 

For nearly nine months now, Tuberville, a freshman senator and former football coach, has been single-handedly blocking Senate consideration of military promotions in protest of the Pentagon’s abortion policy, a crusade that has earned him the enmity of many of his colleagues and left him increasingly isolated. The blockade has ballooned to include 452 officers, the department said last week—more than half of the total number of generals and admirals in the Defense Department. The Army, Navy and Marines were for a time all without a confirmed top officer for the first time in history, even as the U.S. is supporting allies in two wars abroad.

Tuberville contends the Biden administration is to blame for the impasse. “It takes two people to get it done,” he said. “I guess they think I would have broken by now.”

Democrats and many Republicans accuse Tuberville of playing a dangerous game. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin blamed him for damaging military readiness, hindering officer retention and “upending the lives of far too many American military families.” Even his wife, Tuberville says, has confronted him about it. In an extraordinary scene on the Senate floor Nov. 1, his GOP colleagues excoriated him in sharply personal terms. A Republican aide said they intend to do it again Monday if the situation isn’t resolved.


Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin blamed Tommy Tuberville for damaging military readiness. 
Tuberville, whose father fought in World War II, seems pleased that recent events have drawn attention to his cause. “Nobody noticed early on,” he said in his courtly Southern drawl. “Now that, you know, we’re on the edge of another war in a different part of the world…when you’re tinkering around with the Pentagon, it made a little bit more sense of urgency.”

The Nov. 1 floor session was a dramatic scene for the normally staid Senate. Over five hours of impassioned speeches, fewer than five of Tuberville’s 48 Republican colleagues urged him to drop the holds. Several publicly berated him, saying their efforts to placate him in private had gotten nowhere and they were at their wits’ end. They insulted his intelligence, questioned his integrity, accused him of imperiling national security and even implied he bore responsibility for the recent hospitalization of the Marine Corps commandant, Gen. Eric Smith. Before his apparent cardiac arrest on Oct. 29, Smith had complained about having to do two jobs as a result of the confirmation logjam.

 “No matter whether you believe it or not, Senator Tuberville, this is doing great damage to our military,” said Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.), an Air Force veteran.

The Supreme Court did more than overrule Roe v. Wade and allow states to ban abortion. The court showed how it views rights that aren’t explicitly mentioned in the Constitution. WSJ’s Jess Bravin explains. Illustration: Ryan Trefes
“I am a pro-life woman. I am also a veteran and a combat veteran,” said Sen. Joni Ernst (R., Iowa), an Army veteran who serves in GOP leadership. “I continue to fight for life—in ways that make sense.”

Sen. Dan Sullivan (R., Alaska), a Marine Corps Reserve colonel, red-faced and yelling as the night wore on, declared himself “really frustrated” and called Tuberville “100% wrong.”

As his colleagues got increasingly worked up, Tuberville remained at his desk in his bright-blue suit, his silver hair combed neatly back, taking the lashings in stride and evenly proclaiming after each name was put up for unanimous consent: “I object.”


To hear Tuberville tell it, he didn’t start this fight. Federal law has long prohibited military hospitals and health insurance from providing or covering abortions except in cases of rape, incest or the mother’s life being at risk, meaning service members and their families must pay out of pocket and are subject to local laws for abortions that don’t meet these criteria. (Then-Sen. Joe Biden voted for the 1984 codification of that restriction; before changing his position during his 2020 presidential campaign, Biden also supported the Hyde Amendment, which has prohibited the use of federal funds for abortion since 1976.) 


Sen. Dan Sullivan (R., Alaska) said he is frustrated with Tommy Tuberville. PHOTO: SENATE TELEVISION/ASSOCIATED PRESS
After the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade last year and several states moved to restrict abortion, Austin issued a memo directing the Defense Department to change its policies to facilitate travel for abortion by giving service members paid time off and travel reimbursement. Similar policies, where the government pays for travel but not the abortion itself, have been allowed under Hyde for such cases as federal prisoners and Peace Corps volunteers. But Tuberville believed this improperly put taxpayers on the hook, violating the spirit if not the letter of Hyde. If such a change was to be made on such a controversial issue, he believed it should come from Congress, not the executive branch. 


In December 2022, Tuberville fired off a letter to Austin threatening to hold up all of the department’s civilian and general and flag officer nominees if it proceeded with the policy. This wasn’t an unprecedented tactic: individual senators frequently use their ability to block nominations to get the attention of cabinet agencies they believe have overstepped. In January, for example, Sen. Michael Bennet (D., Colo.) threatened to hold up nominations because Austin refused to meet with him to discuss the U.S. Space Command. In 2020, Sen. Tammy Duckworth (D., Ill.) also threatened a blanket hold unless then-Sec. Mark Esper confirmed he wouldn’t interfere with the promotion of Lt. Col. Alexander Vindman, who had testified in Donald Trump’s first impeachment trial. In those and similar cases, the senators’ questions were swiftly answered and the holds weren’t imposed.

But in Tuberville’s case, the Pentagon rebuffed him. And so, in February, Tuberville went through with his threat. Tuberville’s holds could have been overcome through a series of procedural votes on each nomination, but Democratic Senate leadership argued that would eat up too much floor time and only validate Tuberville’s tactic. The Pentagon, too, dug in. Austin and Tuberville have had three brief phone conversations on the issue, the last one in mid-July, but Tuberville says they have all consisted of one-sided harangues from the retired four-star general.


Sen. Tommy Tuberville listened to Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin ahead of a military budget hearing last year. PHOTO: J. SCOTT APPLEWHITE/ASSOCIATED PRESS
The Defense Department said that its engagement with Tuberville had been respectful but that the policy in question was legal and nonnegotiable. “Secretary Austin and the Department engaged Senator Tuberville and his office on multiple occasions in good faith and directly relayed how his holds on our general and flag officers have created risks to our military readiness and severely limit the Department’s ability to ensure strategic and operational success,” a Pentagon spokeswoman, Sabrina Singh, said.

The administration’s refusal to come to the table, Tuberville argues, undercuts its claim that the holds have devastated the military. “This thing should have been done after a month, maybe even less than that,” he said.

Tuberville, 69 years old, came to fame long before he entered politics as a superstar college football coach in the South, where football is like a religion and coaches have godlike status. He led Auburn University’s Tigers to eight consecutive bowl appearances with a risk-taking style. He was also accused of disloyalty, repeatedly breaking his public word to take a new job or score a coveted recruit. In 1998, he famously declared he would only ever leave Ole Miss “in a pine box”—only to be announced two days later as the Auburn coach without notifying his Ole Miss players or colleagues.


Tommy Tuberville celebrating his 2020 win in the race for U.S. Senate. PHOTO: BUTCH DILL/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Tuberville said his time in the coaching spotlight was good preparation for his current position. “Listen, I’ve coached in front of 100,000 people before, and when we didn’t play very well, half the stadium that was supposed to be on my side, they even didn’t like me,” he said. “I got called all kind of names, so that doesn’t bother me.” There have been times, he says, when his colleagues’ criticisms and the stories of the military veterans have tugged on his heartstrings and made him search his soul, but he has always come back to his conviction that he’s doing what’s right.

Tuberville ran for Senate in 2020, taking on Trump’s ex-attorney general, Jeff Sessions, who’d gotten crosswise with his former boss for his handling of the Russia investigation. In Tuberville’s first campaign ad, he said, “God sent us Donald Trump because God knew we were in trouble.” He refused to debate his opponents. With Trump’s backing, he easily defeated Sessions and the incumbent Democratic senator, Doug Jones. On Jan. 6, 2021, Tuberville’s first full day in the Senate, he hid in a closet during the Capitol riot, then objected to certifying Biden’s Electoral College victory. Tuberville has since become known for some head-scratching comments, such as misstating the three branches of government and seeming to defend white nationalists.



Tommy Tuberville has been accused of disloyalty during his football coaching career.

It is easy to see why his colleagues find Tuberville frustrating. Contrary to what you might expect, he’s not a fire-and-brimstone type; rather, he is relentlessly amiable, conceding many of his opponents’ arguments and sometimes contradicting himself, yet all the while standing firm. Some Republicans grouse he has undercut the GOP’s traditional strength on national security while highlighting the party’s unpopular position on abortion. His stand, they argue, is self-defeating, less likely to achieve his goal than to result in a change to Senate procedure that would weaken the minority’s power.

But most Republicans are still with him, and Tuberville’s allies believe he would have more leverage if they all united behind him. Sen. Mike Lee (R., Utah) and Rep. Chip Roy (R., Tex.) blasted Sullivan on social media last week for being, in Roy’s words, “focused on tearing down @SenTuberville…while DOD refuses to follow the law.” Conservative groups such as the Heritage Foundation have aired ads and erected billboards praising him back home, and both Trump and former Vice President Mike Pence have lauded him.

Tuberville has said there are compromises that would satisfy him, such as the creation of a private fund for abortion travel. He plans to try to change the policy in the defense-funding bill that he will play a role in negotiating beginning this week. (The House’s top Democratic negotiator, Rep. Adam Smith, responded to that possibility by saying, “No, screw him.”) But all of the solutions Tuberville finds acceptable would require others to bend, not a concession on his part. Any compromise will only be on his terms. 

“You can’t change people’s mind. There’s no reason to try to do that,” Tuberville said. “You’ve just got to take it.”

Lindsay Wise and Nancy A. Youssef contributed to this article.


Conservative groups such as the Heritage Foundation have aired ads and erected billboards praising Tommy Tuberville back home.







Article: 7
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Democrats Grow More Confident in Campaign Message, but More Nervous About Biden
Author: Annie Linskey, Ken Thomas and Katy Stech Ferek
Publication_Date: November 9, 2023 04:15 pm ET
Article_Content: Some in the party worry that the president will drag them down in 2024, even as Tuesday’s elections show abortion issues can motivate voters Democrats need. WASHINGTON—A year away from the 2024 election, Democrats see trends pulling in different directions: an electorate that appears motivated to vote in their favor, particularly on abortion, but is also deeply skeptical of handing another term to the party’s standard-bearer—President Biden. 

The 80-year-old incumbent faced flashing red warning lights this week in the form of fresh polling showing voters’ concerns about his age and weak numbers in swing-state matchups against former President Donald Trump. But Biden’s team and allies see no need for a course correction, pointing to the power of abortion politics and the value of having Trump as a foil.

Democrats said they were vindicated by Tuesday’s off-year election results, in which voters rejected efforts to curtail abortion rights and re-elected a Democratic governor in Kentucky despite attempts to link him to Biden’s first-term agenda. 

“Democrats are on the right page as it relates to the needs and desires of our families and our citizens,” said Rep. Bonnie Watson Coleman (D., N.J.). “It’s just a matter of connecting our substance with our narrative.”

Others are less sure, with some Democrats across the country harboring doubts about whether Biden is the strongest candidate to take on Trump, the likely GOP nominee, even as many acknowledge that the president appears locked into running. Their fears were underlined in recent days by polling and by a warning from David Axelrod, a former strategist to former President Barack Obama, who raised the idea that the party should consider changing horses. 

Voters in Ohio, a state Biden lost in 2020, enshrined abortion rights into the state’s constitution on Tuesday. PHOTO: KAREEM ELGAZZAR/USA TODAY NETWORK/REUTERS
Interviews with a dozen Democratic leaders in five swing states found that they registered varying degrees of concern about the president’s ability to defeat Trump, and some questioned the wisdom of putting him forward again as their nominee. 

“It feels like he was the perfect person for 2020. But not for 2024,” said one former Democratic state lawmaker in Michigan, a key battleground. “He’s a transitional president and you have to know when to transition and it is now.”

Another potential problem for Biden emerged Thursday when Jill Stein announced she plans to seek the Green Party’s nomination for president. Her announcement video highlighted her support for a cease-fire in Gaza, an issue that has roiled the Democratic Party in recent weeks. In 2016, many Democrats believed that she cost Hillary Clinton the presidential election by siphoning votes in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.

Stein joins a growing field of third-party candidates who could scramble the vote in 2024, with environmental attorney Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and academic Cornel West both running as independents.

Also on Thursday, Sen. Joe Manchin (D., W.Va.) announced he wouldn’t run for another term in the Senate. He is viewed as a possible presidential pick for the centrist group No Labels.

The White House instead wanted to focus on the results from Tuesday’s elections. In the three most closely watched states Tuesday turned on abortion rights, an issue the White House has embraced but with which Biden has been personally uncomfortable. Democrats won full control of the Virginia state house in a year where Republicans bet big on taking control of both chambers. Voters in Ohio, a state Biden lost by 8 percentage points in 2020, enshrined abortion rights into the state’s constitution. In deep-red Kentucky, Democratic Gov. Andy Beshear, 45, won re-election after running ads on abortion rights. 

Democrats and Biden’s campaign pointed to the races as proof that Biden’s message and agenda are popular. But some skeptics said those victories couldn’t be attributed to Biden, who wasn’t publicly involved in any of the contests. Biden’s sagging poll numbers, and the unease from Democratic leaders across the country, rest largely on an attribute he can do little to correct: his age, and the perception among voters that he is frail. 

Biden’s own problems, GOP strategist Liam Donovan said on X, formerly known as Twitter, after Tuesday’s election, are why “a good night that otherwise calms Dem nerves nonetheless ratchets up the central contradiction—despite broader success and a favorable environment, the President himself seems uniquely vulnerable.”


Gov. Andy Beshear, left, a Democrat, won re-election in deep-red Kentucky after running ads on abortion rights. PHOTO: RYAN C. HERMENS/LEXINGTON HERALD-LEADER/ZUMA PRESS
Biden turns 81 this month. Trump is 77, but voters don’t tend to have the same concerns about his age, polls show. 

Rick Bloomingdale, a Democratic National Committee member from Pennsylvania and retired labor leader, said that in discussions with friends, including Republicans who don’t like Trump, there is a consistent worry about Biden’s age. “They’re like, ‘Biden is too old,’” he said.

Bloomingdale said he argues that voters should judge the president by his accomplishments instead, but it can be tricky. “Biden is not much of a horn-blower,” Bloomingdale said. “Democrats are good at doing. We’re not as good at telling the story as we should.”

Surveys consistently show voters disapproving of Biden’s handling of the economy and giving Trump more credit on his economic record compared with Biden. Trump has repeatedly pointed to the state of the U.S. economy before the Covid-19 pandemic and assailed Biden for elevated levels of inflation. That has prompted some Democrats to urge the president to make a sharper comparison with Trump on the economy.

Rep. Ro Khanna (D., Calif.) said the election results showed that Democrats had a clear advantage on abortion and divisive issues such as banning books in school. But he said Democrats “still have work to do” on their economic pitch to voters and pointed to President Bill Clinton’s 1996 re-election campaign as a model. 

“They didn’t run a campaign saying, ‘Thank you, Bill Clinton.’ They ran a campaign saying, ‘No way, Newt Gingrich,’” Khanna said of the party’s 1996 campaign, referring to the polarizing GOP House Speaker. “And I think the president needs to say that here’s what the Republicans will do.”

Others were more blunt in their assessments. 

“The sense I get from people is that they are hoping the president will make the decision that it’s in the best interest of the country that a stronger candidate be the Democratic Party’s nominee. I don’t think anyone is prepared to push him out,” said one DNC member, who spoke on condition of anonymity. “At some point, he may have no choice.”


A poll shows that former President Donald Trump leads President Biden in five battleground states. PHOTO: BRANDON BELL/GETTY S
A CNN survey released this week showed Trump with a slight edge over Biden among registered voters nationwide. The New York Times/Siena College poll surveyed six battleground states and showed Trump ahead in Nevada, Georgia, Arizona, Michigan and Pennsylvania. It showed Biden slightly ahead in Wisconsin. The weak numbers come despite the Biden campaign and the DNC having already spent millions of dollars on advertising in those states touting the president’s record.

Even more worrying for Democrats, both surveys indicated that chunks of Biden’s coalition are dissolving with the president receiving lower levels of support from voters who are young, Black or Hispanic.

Both also showed that Biden’s age is a problem. The New York Times poll found that 71% of voters think Biden is too old to be president, a number that has climbed from 34% who said he was too old when asked in 2020. Thirty-nine percent said that Trump is too old to be president, up from 18% who said so in 2020.


The White House and Biden allies dismissed the polling as a mere snapshot in time and said that both Clinton and Obama had poor showings a year ahead of their eventual re-elections. 

Asked Thursday if he thinks he is trailing in battleground states, the president said: “No, I don’t.”

Hillary Clinton, the 2016 Democratic presidential nominee, said Wednesday on ABC’s “The View” that until nominees are chosen, “People are always saying, ‘Well, maybe there’s somebody better out there, let me look over here,’ and ‘Oh, I see somebody better out there.’ That’s natural.” She added that Biden has shown he can do a good job, particularly when compared with Trump’s tenure in the White House. 


President Biden’s campaign team and DNC leaders say they are on track to build a winning organization. PHOTO: JIM LO SCALZO/EFE/ZUMA PRESS
After announcing his re-election bid in April via a video, Biden has focused mostly on fundraising. The president has outraised Trump significantly in the past two quarters, amassing a $91 million war chest with Democratic partners.

Some Democrats want to see more on-the-ground activity from the campaign, with a sharper message. Rep. Steven Horsford (D., Nev.) said he had encouraged Biden “to focus on centering the people—not the politics, not the process. The campaign needs to step up its game and how it’s engaging with voters in states like Nevada.” 

“There’s a sentiment that more needs to be done,” Horsford added, explaining that some of Biden’s accomplishments, including lowering the cost of some prescription drugs, aren’t widely known. 

“The energy is what’s lacking,” said Rep. Raúl Grijalva (D., Ariz.), assessing Biden’s issues connecting with voters, which he thinks will be overcome. “And that comes from having a field organization and that also comes as more and more candidates begin to gear up.” 

Biden’s campaign team and DNC leaders say they are on track to build a winning organization and said that early fretting about whether Biden is getting credit for his accomplishments is misplaced. 

“I will take the point that we have work to do to ingrain those accomplishments in the lives of everyday voters,” said Sam Cornale, the executive director of the DNC. “But that is exactly what a campaign—and this campaign specifically—is designed to do. And we will do it, and he will win.”






Article: 8
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Republican Senators Confront Tommy Tuberville Over Blocked Military Promotions
Author:  Lindsay Wise and Nancy A. Youssef
Publication_Date: November 1, 2023 11:08 pm ET
Article_Content: The Alabama senator has staged a months long protest over the Pentagon’s abortion policy. Sen. Tommy Tuberville has vowed not to let the Senate fast-track confirmations of military promotions, as is traditionally done, until the Pentagon ends its abortion policy. PHOTO: WILL OLIVER/SHUTTERSTOCK
WASHINGTON—Republican senators ran out of patience Wednesday night with Alabama Sen. Tommy Tuberville’s monthslong hold on hundreds of military promotions.

In a dramatic showdown, a group of Tuberville’s fellow Republicans, most of whom have military backgrounds, took to the Senate floor to try to confirm dozens of those promotions, one by one, by voice vote, as growing GOP anger with Tuberville’s hold spilled out into public view after months of private entreaties.

At least 378 generals and admirals are blocked from speedy Senate confirmation because of the hold, which began in February. Tuberville has vowed not to let the chamber fast-track their confirmations, as is traditionally done, until the Pentagon ends its policy of allowing troops leave and travel funds for reproductive healthcare, including abortion. Some Republicans have voiced support for Tuberville, or avoided commenting publicly. Other Republican senators say they disapprove of the Pentagon policy, but argue Tuberville’s holds are counterproductive.

Tuberville objected to the first nominee on the list, Laura Lenderman of the Air Force, to be a three-star general deputy commander, Pacific Air Forces, and went on to object to each promotion his colleagues requested Wednesday, blocking them.


Sen. Dan Sullivan said he had worked closely with Tuberville for months behind the scenes to seek compromise, to no avail. PHOTO: MICHAEL BROCHSTEIN/ZUMA PRESS
“We stand for the most vulnerable of our society, the unborn,” Tuberville said. “I know my colleagues here share that conviction. The disagreement we’re having today is about tactics.” He said the holds weren’t affecting military readiness.

His Republican colleagues disagreed, openly criticizing Tuberville and arguing that ending his blockade has taken on a new urgency in recent weeks because of events overseas. 

“America needs to have our best players, most combat-capable leaders on the field. Right now, that’s not happening. It needs to change,” said Sen. Dan Sullivan (R., Alaska), a colonel in the Marine Corps Reserve, who led Wednesday’s GOP effort to break the holds. He was joined by Sens. Joni Ernst of Iowa, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Todd Young of Indiana and Mitt Romney of Utah.

Sullivan said he had worked closely with Tuberville for months behind the scenes to seek compromise, to no avail. 

“We haven’t made progress, and the world is a dangerous place,” said Sullivan, who called Tuberville “100% wrong” on readiness. “So tonight we’re taking another approach,” he said.

All told, over more than four hours, the senators brought up 61 promotions one by one, all of which Tuberville blocked. As the night drew on, Sullivan’s pitches for officers became more pointed, referencing the leaders of China and Russia.

“Xi Jinping is watching this right now, going, ‘I can’t believe they’re not letting these guys command.’…He’s loving this. So is [Vladimir] Putin. They’re loving it,” he said. “How dumb can we be, man?”

Graham said Tuberville is opening up Pandora’s box, setting a precedent where Democrats could similarly hold up promotions over any dispute they had with a future Republican White House. He said Tuberville should take his argument to the courts if he believes the policy is illegal, rather than punish officers for a policy they don’t control.

“Don’t ruin the lives of all these people who have been serving the nation for decades. This doesn’t help anybody. It doesn’t help any cause,” said Graham, an Air Force veteran. “There’s a reason this has not been done this way for a couple hundred years,” he said.



After Hamas attacked Israel on Oct. 7, the U.S. has sent two aircraft carrier strike groups, roughly 12 ships in all, to the Middle East as well as hundreds of additional ground troops and several air defense systems to protect U.S. bases under attack in Iraq and Syria. But the admiral nominated to command those ships while they are in the region, Rear Adm. George Wikoff, has been awaiting confirmation as has Vice Adm. Brad Cooper, slated to be the deputy commander of U.S. Central Command, which is responsible for all U.S. military operations in the Middle East.

Both Wikoff and Cooper’s names were on the list of officers that Sullivan and other Republican senators tried to confirm unanimously on Wednesday. Ernst, who asked that Cooper be confirmed, said he needs to be in his job as the world faces potential “World War III” because of the ongoing conflict in the Middle East.

“This will be remembered. It’s a dark evening. This will be remembered,” said Ernst as she wrapped up her final set of remarks.

The Republican effort also comes within days of Marine Corps Commandant Gen. Eric Smith’s hospitalization after he collapsed Sunday near his Washington home. Smith remains hospitalized. Because there was no confirmed assistant commandant, the Marines named Marine Lt. Gen. Karsten Heckl as acting commandant. 

Smith’s condition prompted Tuberville to collect 16 signatures from Republican senators on Tuesday to force a vote to confirm the U.S. Marine Corps’s second-in-command, Lt. Gen. Christopher Mahoney.

Later that day, Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.) announced he was teeing up confirmation votes on Mahoney, as well as Adm. Lisa Franchetti as chief of naval operations and Gen. David Allvin as the chief of staff of the U.S. Air Force. Those votes are expected Thursday.

Sullivan also had gathered signatures Tuesday to force a vote to advance the promotions of Franchetti and Allvin.

Tuberville has said that his hold doesn’t prevent Schumer from confirming each nominee separately, but Democrats and others have pointed out that doing so would occupy hundreds of hours of floor time.

Fed up with the blockade, Senate Democrats have discussed using a rare process to move the military promotions forward in a group through a standing order resolution, which would require 60 votes. Schumer has endorsed the effort, but it is unclear whether it can get the nine Republican votes needed to advance in the 51-49 Senate.

“Look, patience is wearing thin with Sen. Tuberville on both sides of the aisle,” Schumer said Wednesday.





Article: 9
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Tuberville Pushes to Confirm Marines’ No. 2
Author:  Katy Stech Ferek, Lindsay Wise and Gordon Lubold
Publication_Date:October 31, 2023 08:34 pm ET
Article_Content: The Alabama senator is pressing to quickly confirm Lt. Gen. Christopher Mahoney after the top officer was hospitalized. Tuberville has held up hundreds of military promotions. Sen. Tommy Tuberville began blocking promotions for hundreds of military leaders earlier this year. PHOTO: KEVIN DIETSCH/GETTY S
WASHINGTON—Sen. Tommy Tuberville (R., Ala.), who has held up hundreds of military promotions for months, moved Tuesday to force a vote to confirm the U.S. Marine Corps’s second-in-command after its top officer fell ill and was taken to the hospital.

Lt. Gen. Christopher Mahoney was nominated by the White House in July but had yet to be confirmed by the Senate along with hundreds of other senior officers’ promotions who remain frozen by Tuberville in a political battle over the Pentagon’s abortion policy.

Tuberville took the action after Marine Corps Commandant Gen. Eric Smith collapsed on Sunday while jogging in Washington’s Capitol Hill neighborhood about a block from the Marine Barracks. The Marine Corps hasn’t provided more details about Smith’s condition, but said he fell ill Sunday evening and has been hospitalized since. Officials said he has been under sedation since the incident around 5 p.m. Sunday.

On Tuesday, Tuberville secured enough signatures to force the Senate to consider the nomination of Mahoney using a chamber procedure that requires support from at least 16 senators, said Steven Stafford, his spokesman. 


Lt. Gen. Christopher Mahoney was nominated by the White House in July. PHOTO: U.S. MARINES
Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.) on Tuesday night moved to set up votes to advance the promotion for Mahoney, along with two other high-level military officials: Adm. Lisa Franchetti as the chief of naval operations and Gen. David Allvin as the chief of staff of the U.S. Air Force.

Schumer said Tuberville “should drop his blanket holds at once, and in the meantime the Senate will proceed to confirm these nominations that should have been swiftly approved long ago.”

Sen. Dan Sullivan (R., Alaska) had gathered signatures to force a vote to advance the promotions of Franchetti and Allvin as well. 

“It’s a dangerous world,” Sullivan told reporters. “Let’s move. Come on.”

The maneuver is the same one that lawmakers used in September to vote to install Gen. CQ Brown Jr. as the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff along with several other military leaders, including Smith. Democrats have resisted efforts to confirm the military leaders one by one, saying that doing so would take hundreds of hours of required debate and voting under current Senate rules. 

Tuberville has said he won’t lift his hold on the promotions until the military changes its policy or Congress passes a measure codifying the policy. He reiterated that stance on Tuesday. 

“Oh, no,” said Tuberville when asked if he intended to change his strategy of holding up military promotions in light of Smith’s health incident. “If they’re worried about readiness, they can move the policy back the way it was,” he said. 

Tuberville began blocking promotions for hundreds of military leaders earlier this year, vowing not to let the Senate expedite their confirmations until the Pentagon agreed to end its policy of allowing troops leave and travel funds for reproductive healthcare, including abortion. 

As of Tuesday, 379 nominations are on hold, including some that concern the Middle East, Pentagon officials said.

Tuberville has repeatedly said that he didn’t believe the holds were affecting military readiness and that the government shouldn’t be paying for anything related to abortion. Democrats say the lack of options for women on reproductive services would hurt readiness and be unfair for service members who don’t choose where they are deployed.

Defense officials have said the holds could affect retention and recruiting and were forcing some generals to put off retirement and causing junior officers to reconsider their military careers. Some service members are in temporary housing because they sold their homes anticipating moves, and others don’t know where to enroll their children for school, officials have said. Even those not promoted were affected, the Pentagon has said, because they often had to do two jobs, as generals and admirals retired and the positions had no successors in place.



While senators sometimes put holds on Pentagon political appointees who have policy-making responsibilities, the Tuberville move broke with Senate tradition as it applies to career military officers who aren’t responsible for making policy. It led to the first time in military history that several services didn’t have a confirmed leader.

Senate Democrats frustrated by the blockade have discussed using a rare process to move the military promotions forward in a group through a standing order resolution. It is unclear whether Senate leaders would support that maneuver, which would mark a departure from long-held chamber rules. It would also require 60 lawmakers to vote in favor of it.

Smith has been doing two jobs since he was confirmed, since the hold on other nominations meant the Corps’s No. 2 hadn’t been approved.

“It is not a sustainable thing when the last thing you do is flip your computer off at 11:30 at night and you’re getting up at 5 o’clock in the morning,” he said during a conference sponsored by Defense News in September. 

The Alabama Democratic Party blamed Tuberville for Smith’s health condition. “This is on your shoulders. Resign,” the group said on social media. 

Smith was confirmed to lead the Marine Corps in late September. In lieu of a Senate-confirmed assistant commandant, while Smith is in the hospital, his duties are being performed by the most senior Marine after Smith, Lt. Gen. Karsten Heckl.

Heckl is the deputy commandant for Combat Development and Integration.







Article: 10
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: On Debate Stage and Campaign Trail, Republicans Still Don’t Know How to Talk About Abortion
Author:  Molly Ball
Publication_Date:Nov. 9, 2023 5:00 am ET
Article_Content:  For a change, the central problem facing the candidates in Wednesday night’s Republican debate wasn’t necessarily Donald Trump—yet the men and woman who would be president had little better idea how to solve it. 

Tuesday’s off-year election offered devastating new evidence of the unpopularity of the Republican Party’s positioning on abortion. Yet even as the party collectively reeled from this setback, with lawmakers and operatives squabbling over how to move forward, the party’s presidential candidates struggled to offer an alternative approach. Taken together, their responses on the issue were a revealing glimpse into the dilemma vexing the GOP after a series of bruising election losses.

Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis said he was “sick of Republicans losing” and pointed to campaign strategy as an explanation for Tuesday’s result. The antiabortion movement, he argued, had been “caught flat-footed on these referendums” such as the one voters approved Tuesday that inserted a right to abortion into the Ohio constitution. Earlier this year, DeSantis signed a six-week abortion ban that caused some influential Republicans to question his viability in a national campaign. After initially avoiding a position on a federal ban, he has said he would support a 15-week national limit.

From male sexual responsibility to being “pro-life for the whole life,” Republican candidates laid out their positions on abortion at the debate in Florida on Wednesday, one day after Ohio voters enshrined abortion access in the state constitution. Photo: Rebecca Blackwell/Associated Press
Businessman Vivek Ramaswamy, who lives in Ohio, said he was “upset” by Tuesday’s outcome and lamented Republicans becoming a “party of losers.” He said that Republicans should be promoting “sexual responsibility for men” through paternity tests, apparently arguing that voters who rejected government control over women’s bodies would like it better if applied to both genders.

Former United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley, the only woman in the field, argued that Republicans should “stop the judgment” and “focus on how to save as many babies as we can.” Repeating a point she had made in previous debates, she said it was disingenuous to promise voters further restrictions that won’t get through Congress. “Don’t make the American people think we’re going to push something on them when we don’t even have the votes in the Senate,” she said. Haley proclaimed herself “unapologetically pro-life” and said she would sign whatever restrictions Congress could pass, but she didn’t say what she would personally favor as a hypothetical federal limit.

Former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie made a similar argument on different grounds, saying states should make their own policies and the federal government should stay out of it.

South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott, in a red tie, and biotech entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy have struggled to build momentum in the race for the Republican nomination. PHOTO: MARCO BELLO/REUTERS
South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott had the most concrete stance in terms of federal policy, arguing for a “15-week national limit” and contending that 75% of Americans would agree. But it was just such a stance that Virginia voters appeared to reject on Tuesday—and Haley fired back by pointing out that Scott didn’t initially support a 15-week federal ban proposed last year by his fellow South Carolina senator, Lindsey Graham.

The collective evasion only intensified the feeling of unreality that has pervaded this year’s debates for the Republican nomination, in which also-rans have bickered while the front-runner, former President Donald Trump, steadily builds a double-digit lead in absentia. Trump, for his part, didn’t mention abortion at the rally he held not far from the debate site, though his son’s fiancée, Kimberly Guilfoyle, praised him in her introduction for having “stood for the unborn.” 

Trump has alternated between taking credit for the Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade and expressing discomfort with states’ moves to restrict the procedure. He has called DeSantis’s six-week ban “too harsh” and “a terrible mistake” without articulating a clear position of his own, yet has drawn only scattered criticism from the antiabortion activist groups that have traditionally been major Republican power brokers.

The fallout from the elections reverberated across Washington Wednesday. In addition to the Ohio referendum, Republicans fell short of their hopes in state races in Kentucky and Virginia in which abortion was a central theme of the campaigns. 


Abortion-rights supporters celebrate winning the Ohio referendum in Columbus, Ohio, on Tuesday. PHOTO: ADAM CAIRNS/USA TODAY NETWORK/REUTERS
Sen. J.D. Vance (R., Ohio) said on social media that the result in Ohio was “a gut punch.” Sen. Thom Tillis (R., N.C.) said states such as Ohio “need to get on board with where their constituents are.” Rep. Marcus Molinaro (R., N.Y.) said that in the wake of the Supreme Court decision, “the American people want every level of government to more appropriately respect the difficult choices women have to make.”

The party’s Senate campaign arm planned to push candidates on next year’s ballot to campaign vocally against a national abortion ban, articulating the position in speeches and campaign ads, NBC News reported. GOP Senators were briefed on the issue in September but no consensus policy position emerged.

On some level, the lack of willingness to confront the issue in the debate was understandable. Primary campaigns tend to be more about feeding red meat to the base—which in Republicans’ case is strongly against abortion—than reaching general election voters. The moderators, who only brought up the topic in a brief segment just before the debate’s end, were at least as responsible as the candidates for the lack of emphasis on it. Haley has previously broached the topic as part of her broader electability argument, yet Iowa caucus-goers have generally rewarded hard-core social conservatives who take strong positions against abortion.

Where the party will land is anybody’s guess. Given Trump’s lead in the primary polls, the internal debate may be irrelevant. His tendency is to seem to endorse several sides of an issue simultaneously, allowing voters to hear what they want to hear. It appears likely that different wings of the party will continue to quarrel over the issue—while Democrats sit back and relish the fight.






Article: 11
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Where Republican Candidates Stand on Abortion
Author: Eliza Collins 
Publication_Date: November 8, 2023 07:19 pm ET
Article_Content: Abortion access is likely to be a hot topic during tonight’s debate following election results across the country Tuesday that favored abortion-rights supporters.
All of the Republican candidates have said they oppose abortion to some degree but they disagree on what restrictions should look like and how the issue should be talked about. Here’s where the candidates on stage tonight stand on abortion:
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis signed a six week abortion ban his state. He has been noncommittal on what a federal ban would look like.

As governor of South Carolina, Nikki Haley signed a 20-week abortion ban into law. However, she has since said Republicans need to talk about the issue differently to appeal to a wider audience.

Sen. Tim Scott (R., S.C.) has said at a minimum there should be a 15-week abortion ban.

Former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has said he is “pro-life” but the issue should be left up to the states.

Entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy has said he supports a six-week ban at the state level, but would oppose a national ban.

Former president Donald Trump, who won’t be on stage tonight, has taken a somewhat fuzzy approach. He often touts the Supreme Court nominees he put in place who ultimately helped overturn Roe v. Wade. At the same time, hasn’t endorsed a national law banning abortion at some point in pregnancy. Trump has previously said positive things about a 15-week ban but has not committed.



Article: 12
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Candidates Divided Over Abortion
Author: Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date:
Article_Content: Supporters cheer following the announcement of the projected passage of Issue 1, a state constitutional right to abortion, in Columbus, Ohio, on Tuesday. (Adam Cairns/USA Today Network/Reuters)
Candidates split over the federal government’s role in restricting abortion, an issue that has increasingly influenced voters to head to the polls in wake of the Supreme Court’s decision overturning Roe v. Wade last year. Nikki Haley, the former South Carolina governor and U.N. ambassador, said passing a ban on the federal level would be an uphill battle and the matter will almost certainly be left to the states. “You have to be honest with the American people,” she said.
Sen. Tim Scott disagreed, vowing to support a 15-week ban on the federal level. Chris Christie, the former governor of New Jersey, said the issue should be decided in each state. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, who signed a six-week ban that hasn’t yet taken effect earlier this year, said anti-abortion movement has “been caught flat-footed” on ballot measures enshrining abortion protections.
Abortion-rights groups have experienced victory after victory in elections since the Supreme Court’s June 2022 decision. The Republican presidential candidates have all voiced opposition to abortion – but have disagreed on how far to restrict abortion and whether they would pursue a federal ban. While the overturning of Roe v. Wade was a long-sought goal for anti-abortion activists and lawmakers, Republicans on the state and federal level have struggled to come to a consensus on their best path forward.








Article: 13
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: GOP Debate Takeaways: Haley Takes Fire as She Jockeys for Second Place
Author: Alex Leary and John McCormick
Publication_Date: November 8, 2023 10:56 pm ET
Article_Content: The candidates fail to find a breakout moment at the Miami forum; “You’re just scum,” Nikki Haley tells Vivek Ramaswamy.GOP candidates Nikki Haley and Vivek Ramaswamy traded barbs in response to a question about what they would do to combat concerns over TikTok’s China-based parent company, ByteDance. MIAMI—Former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley, who has shown momentum in recent weeks, came under sustained attack in Wednesday’s Republican presidential primary debate as she competes with Florida Gov. Ron DeSanti to be the leading alternative to former President Donald Trump. She also delivered several of her own shots at DeSantis, who tried to float above the fray, but engaged with her on China, energy policy and a handful of other issues. A confrontation between the two had been brewing, amplified by a closely watched poll that recently showed Haley and DeSantis tied for second in Iowa, where nomination balloting starts Jan. 15. But second place may not be worth much given Trump’s commanding lead in the polls. After an opening question that asked candidates to make a case against Trump, who skipped the event, the debate centered on testy exchanges between those on stage. “You’re just scum,” Haley said at one point to biotech entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy, after he said her daughter had used TikTok, amid a discussion of banning the widely popular Chinese app. Here are key takeaways from the debate, moderated by Lester Holt and Kristen Welker of NBC News and Hugh Hewitt of the Salem Radio Network:

Rivals Try to Slow Haley

Haley was a top target throughout the evening as others tried to slow her momentum. She took heat over her foreign-policy positions, attempts to spur Chinese investment in her home state and earnings from her positions on corporate boards, including Boeing.

In relation to China, Haley threw a punch at DeSantis as she called for an end to all formal trade relations “until they stop murdering Americans from fentanyl, something Ron has yet to say that he’s going to do.” Nikki Haley faced attacks during the Republican presidential primary debate in Miami. PHOTO: REBECCA BLACKWELL/ASSOCIATED PRESS
DeSantis responded by saying Haley had welcomed China into South Carolina, “gave them land near a military base” and “wrote the Chinese ambassador a love letter saying what a great friend they were.” Haley noted a Florida economic development arm had sought to attract Chinese investment.

Haley hit DeSantis again by calling him “liberal” when it comes to environmental matters. “Just own it, if that’s the case,” she said. “But don’t keep saying that you are something that you’re not.” DeSantis in response alluded to how Floridians have for years resisted oil drilling and protecting the state’s environment. Republican presidential candidates weighed in on how Israel should handle Hamas, at the third GOP debate held in Miami on Wednesday, advising Benjamin Netanyahu to take all necessary measures to destroy Hamas. Photo: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty s
Major Foreign Policy Differences

The candidates were largely aligned on support for Israel in its war with Hamas. But divisions emerged on continued funding for Ukraine.

“America can never be so arrogant to think we don’t need friends,” Haley said, continuing to advocate for Ukraine. Russia and China, she said, are “salivating” over waning U.S. support. DeSantis questioned the level of aid being proposed and said European nations need to “step up” and give more. Ramaswamy went further, saying that “Ukraine is not a paragon of democracy” and that he was “absolutely unpersuaded” by the call for more money. The question of support for Ukraine split Nikki Haley, Ron DeSantis and Vivek Ramaswamy. PHOTO: ANNA MONEYMAKER/GETTY S
Other Candidates Vie for Attention

Haley and DeSantis, who were positioned at the center of the stage, were flanked by Ramaswamy, South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott and former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie.

Scott, who has struggled to stand out in previous debates, was slightly more assertive, taking advantage of a smaller field. But he also declined at times to give direct answers and likely did little to help himself. Christie also didn’t find a breakout moment.

Ramaswamy gained attention after the first debate, but has failed to build momentum. Asked about the front-runner, he instead attacked the media and Republican National Committee Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel. “We have become the party of losers,” he said.

Ramaswamy also talked about avoiding mistakes of the “neocon establishment,” alluding to a growing isolationism in the GOP. He took a shot at both Haley and DeSantis asking, “Do you want a leader from a different generation who is going to put this country first or do you want Dick Cheney in 3-inch heels, in which case we’ve got two of them on stage now?”

Haley later corrected Ramaswamy: “They’re 5-inch heels and I don’t wear them unless you can run in them.”

Abortion Splits Field

The debate played out against a backdrop of some big Democratic wins in elections a day earlier that left some Republicans questioning whether President Biden will be as easy to defeat in 2024 as they have thought. Abortion played heavily in those elections.

Haley and DeSantis tried to strike a balance, at least rhetorically, on the issue. “I stand for a culture of life,” DeSantis said, while adding he understood some states would differ in their policies. The governor, who earlier this year signed a 6-week ban, said antiabortion advocates were caught “flat-footed” on referendums, such as one Ohio voters approved on Tuesday establishing a right to abortion. 

Haley called herself “unapologetically pro-life,” but also said she didn’t fault people for having a different view. “Let’s find consensus,” she said. “We don’t need to divide America over this issue any more.” 

Scott challenged Haley and DeSantis to “join me in a 15-week limit” at the national level. Haley responded that she “would support anything that would pass because that would save more babies,” but wouldn’t commit to a specific limit. The candidates exit the stage after the debate, which front-runner Donald Trump skipped in favor of his own event in nearby Hialeah, Fla. PHOTO: ANNA MONEYMAKER/GETTY S
Trump Takes Hits, Offers Own Programming

As his challengers debated, Trump spoke to supporters at a rally in nearby Hialeah as he continued to run out the clock on a narrowing field of rivals struggling to dent his massive lead.

The former president flexed his status in the race and mocked the low ratings for the previous debate. “Every time I’m indicted I consider it a great badge of honor because I’m being indicted for you,” he said, referring to his legal problems.

But even as many analysts view him as the eventual nominee, politics can take unknown turns. For 77-year-old Trump, that could be a conviction in one of those cases or health reasons. Candidates were each given a chance to make the case why they, not Trump, should take the nomination. DeSantis said the former president is a “a lot different guy than he was in 2016” and said he failed to complete the border wall and added to soaring federal spending.

Haley suggested Trump has gotten “weak in the knees” when it comes to U.S. involvement abroad. “I don’t think he’s the right president now,” she said, adding, “He put us $8 trillion in debt.”

Christie said the party will fail if it nominates Trump. “Anybody who is going to be spending the next year and a half of their life focusing on keeping themselves out of jail in courtrooms cannot lead this party or this country,” he said.






Article: 14
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Ohio Voters Enshrine Abortion Access in State Constitution
Author: Kris Maher and Jon Kamp
Publication_Date: November 8, 2023 12:32 am ET
Article_Content: Ballot initiative was latest test of where voters stand on reproductive rights a year before presidential elections. Supporters of the abortion-rights referendum cheer the results Tuesday in Columbus, Ohio. PHOTO: ANDREW SPEAR/GETTY S
Ohio voters decided Tuesday to put abortion rights in the Midwestern state’s constitution, one of several states where the issue resonated with voters and showed its potential to help Democrats next year.

The Ohio vote was another key test of where voters stand on one of the most consequential issues heading into next year’s presidential election. The abortion debate also played into Tuesday victories for Democrats, who held their majority in the Virginia Senate and wrestled the majority from Republicans in the state’s House of Delegates. Also, Democrat Andy Beshear won another term as governor of Kentucky, where he criticized abortion restrictions passed by the legislature.

Since the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade more than a year ago, voters had defeated ballot measures that would have restricted abortion rights in other red states such as Kansas and Kentucky. 


The Ohio vote was the toughest referendum fight yet, however. For the first time, abortion-rights advocates were trying to pass protections in a solidly Republican-leaning state. The Associated Press called the race after the abortion-rights ballot measure took a comfortable lead during vote counting.

In a statement praising the passage of the Ohio ballot measure, President Biden said efforts by Republicans across the country to restrict abortion access were out of step with the vast majority of Americans. “Tonight, Americans once again voted to protect their fundamental freedoms—and democracy won,” he said.

The measure will establish a state constitutional right to make one’s own reproductive decisions, including about abortion. It will allow the state to prohibit abortion after fetal viability, which is typically around 22 to 24 weeks, except when a woman’s life or health is at risk.

Shaylynn Michael, who works in retail sales for a cellphone company in Steubenville, Ohio, said she voted in favor of the ballot measure. The 26-year-old Democrat said her son was born shortly after Roe v. Wade was overturned.

“As someone who had just had a child, I couldn’t imagine if something were to be medically wrong that could endanger my life not being able to have a medical procedure to save my life,” she said. “I just don’t believe that other people should have the right to decide what someone does with their body.”

Other voters in Steubenville, in a former steelmaking region in eastern Ohio close to Pennsylvania and West Virginia, said they opposed the ballot measure, known as Issue 1. Many cited their opposition to abortion on religious grounds or said they believed the issue should be handled through legislation rather than a constitutional amendment.


Val Halz sits at a watch party for opponents of the abortion-rights measure Tuesday in Columbus, Ohio. 
Married couple Greg Rayburn and Christa Rayburn, 58 and 48, respectively, said they were worried the ballot measure could lead to minors receiving abortions without parental consent. They both voted no.

“I have three teenage daughters,” said Christa Rayburn, who like her husband is a Republican. “Even if they didn’t follow my wishes, it would break my heart that I couldn’t be there to support them.”


In another notable contest, the AP said voters in Maine rejected a measure to create a new consumer-owned electric utility by forcing a buyout of two investor-owned companies that currently cover most of the New England state. This was the second-most-expensive ballot fight on Tuesday after the Ohio abortion vote, fueled by spending from two investor-owned utilities that fought to keep their jobs, according to Ballotpedia, a nonpartisan election site.

The Ohio and Maine contests were among more than two dozen ballot initiatives in five states on Tuesday, with other questions ranging from whether to legalize marijuana to how to spend tax money from cigarette sales. Texas has the most such measures with 14, including several that could provide billions of dollars in funding for new power plants, state parks, water infrastructure and broadband projects.

Voters in Ohio also decided Tuesday to make recreational marijuana legal in the state. Marijuana had been legal in 23 states, with most of those approving its use through ballot measures. Ohioans expressed stronger views about the abortion measure, and many were already looking ahead to next year’s presidential contest. The Supreme Court has some really controversial cases on its docket—including whether domestic abusers should have access to guns and whether the abortion pill should be legal. They all came from one lower court: the Fifth Circuit. WSJ explains why. Photo illustration: Madeline Marshall
The Rayburns, who voted against the abortion measure, said they both plan to support Donald Trump. Christa Rayburn said she believes the many legal cases against the former president are politically motivated.

“If all of these things are true against Donald Trump, why didn’t they do this seven years ago?” she said. “It’s because there’s an election coming up and they really want to keep him off the ballot.”

Toni Hubbard, a 76-year-old pastor who also voted against the abortion measure, said she would support President Biden. She said she thinks attacks on his age are misplaced.

Hubbard, a Democrat, said she fears a Trump victory next year. “He will tear down the country if he’s in there,” she said. Voters cast ballots Tuesday in Toledo, Ohio. PHOTO: EMILY ELCONIN/BLOOMBERG NEWS
In Ohio’s high-stakes abortion fight, campaigns on both sides of the issue received more than $71 million in contributions, with supporters of abortion rights receiving $41 million, compared with roughly $30 million for opponents, according to Ballotpedia. 

Conservative groups centered much of their advertising campaign on the issues of parental consent and late-term abortion. The Ohio amendment doesn’t include language that would change the state’s parental-consent law, and currently minors must get their parents’ approval for an abortion. But a legal analysis by the state’s Republican attorney general said “there is no guarantee” that the current parental-consent law would remain in effect if the amendment is passed. Opponents had used the issue to galvanize voters.

“It is the strongest messaging by far,” said Michael Gonidakis, president of Ohio Right to Life, before Tuesday’s vote. “When you mess around with parents and their kids, parents unite to stop it—even pro-choice parents.” 

Gonidakis and others had said that the proposed amendment would open the door to people under the age of 18 obtaining abortions without their parents being notified and consenting. Legal scholars said that would only happen if the state’s existing parental-consent law is struck down in the courts. Abortion-rights supporters celebrate winning the Ohio referendum Tuesday in Columbus, Ohio. PHOTO: MEGAN JELINGER/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY S
“What the opposition is trying to do is insert other strategies like parental rights into the conversation to distract from their ultimate goal of a national ban of abortion,” said Alexis McGill Johnson, president of Planned Parenthood, before the vote. 

Abortion-rights groups said that Republicans in the state used their political power to try to deceive voters about the measure in other ways, such as by changing the summary language of the amendment to “whether an unborn child is viable,” rather than a reference to fetal viability in the wording used in the draft submitted by proponents. 

Tuesday’s ballot question followed one pushed by antiabortion groups in August—which Ohio voters rejected—that would have made it harder to amend the state constitution. 

An Ohio law banning abortion at six weeks has been held up by a court injunction and currently doctors can perform abortions in the state up until about 22 weeks of pregnancy.

Some voters said they supported the abortion measure, but still believe the procedure should be performed in limited situations.

In Steubenville, Maryann Bush-Jeter said she is a Christian and a nurse and decided to vote in favor of Issue 1 because she believes there are times, such as when a pregnant woman’s life is in jeopardy, when abortion is appropriate.

“I don’t think it should be used as a means of birth control. No, I do not,” she said.

Major Ballot Measures

Colorado
Approve property tax changes
Allow state to retain surplus revenue from taxes on cigarettes
Maine
Create consumer-owned utility
Prohibit election spending by foreign governments
Allow access to vehicle on-board diagnostic systems for repairs
New York 
Remove debt limits for small city school districts
Ohio
Provide each individual the right to make and carry out reproductive decisions
Legalize recreational use of marijuana for adults
Texas
Create or alter funds to support:
—higher education research
—water infrastructure
—gas-fueled power plants
—broadband infrastructure
—creation/maintenance of state parks
Prohibit the legislature from enacting a “wealth tax” in the future
Increase a tax exemption for property taxes







Article: 15
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Dilemma for 2024 GOP Candidates: How to Restrict Abortions and Win Elections
Author: Tim Hanrahan 
Publication_Date: November 8, 2023 02:36 pm ET
Article_Content: The U.S. Supreme Court in Washington earlier this week. (Stefani Reynolds/AFP/Getty s)
The broad victories for Democrats in Tuesday’s 2023 state elections showed again the power of abortion rights in motivating many voters – and how the issue could be a liability for Republicans headed into 2024. The Supreme Court decision ending the right to abortion was the culmination of a decades-long quest by social conservatives, but has also sparked divisions within the party over whether to leave the matter to the states or seek some sort of federal ban. Meantime, centrist voters have rallied to Democrats who defend broad access to the procedure.
On the eve of the GOP presidential debate, candidate Vivek Ramaswamy didn’t offer a clear path forward for Republicans, if they want to both limit of ban abortion and win elections. “On the merits, our pro-life movement and I am part of it, needs to be better about the way we discuss this issue, actually talk about greater access to adoption, to child care -- further -- even go further to sexual responsibility for men,” he told CNN.







Article: 16
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: The Abortion-Rights Movement Is on a Winning Streak
Author:  Julie Bykowicz and Laura Kusisto
Publication_Date: November 6, 2023 05:00 am ET
Article_Content: Elections on Tuesday will test whether Democrats can keep benefiting from the issue in 2024. On Tuesday, a ballot measure in Ohio will ask voters to protect abortion access, a test of whether the abortion-rights movement can keep up its momentum in state contests after the federal reversal of Roe v. Wade. In the aftermath of the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe. v. Wade, abortion-rights supporters have put their opponents on defense by spending more money on advocacy, passing state-level protections through ballot measures and helping elect Democrats. 

On Tuesday, two states will test whether the abortion-rights movement can keep up its momentum. In Ohio, a ballot measure will ask voters to protect abortion access, while in Virginia, the issue could help decide which party controls the state legislature. 

Abortion is expected to feature prominently in the 2024 elections. Efforts are under way in at least six states to ask voters next year to consider abortion’s legality. That includes Arizona, which could be pivotal to controlling both the White House and the Senate. 

After the Supreme Court’s Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization decision wiped out Roe’s federal protection for abortion, some 16 states with Republican legislatures have banned or sharply restricted the procedure. Yet in five states where voters have been asked to weigh in directly, including Republican-heavy Kansas and Kentucky, they have favored abortion rights. 

Alexis McGill Johnson, president of Planned Parenthood, said abortion will dominate elections for the foreseeable future, contrasting the issue’s resonance with concerns about inflation and Republican infighting in Congress. “People don’t often forget when their rights have been taken away,” she said.

Abortion gave Democrats a significant boost in last year’s midterms, raising confidence among abortion-rights activists and candidates alike. Antiabortion organizations, by contrast, are struggling to develop a politically attractive message and raise the $100 million or more they plan to spend next year.

“We’ve never been good at the state level,” said Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, an antiabortion group. “We have a very diverse country. It makes sense that each state deciding what to do about abortion will be a cumbersome process with fits and starts.”

“That’s what I say to our team, and to candidates who are freaked out,” she said.

As antiabortion groups work to turn the tide, they have piled millions of dollars into Ohio, spending more than they have on any state ballot initiative since Dobbs. They are still being outspent by more than two to one, campaign finance reports filed at the end of October show.   

It is perhaps the toughest battle yet for abortion-rights proponents because it is their first attempt since Dobbs to pass protections for abortions in a more conservative state. Abortion opponents argue that voter passions have cooled since that decision more than a year ago. 

One thing “no one anticipated was how much the fear of change would dominate that first year post-Roe,” said Dave Zanotti, chief executive of the Ohio-based conservative American Policy Roundtable. “The climate of 2023,” he added, “ is profoundly different than immediately post-Dobbs.” 

The Ohio ballot measure would enshrine in the state constitution the right to have an abortion throughout much of pregnancy, preventing the Republican-dominated legislature from passing laws that strictly limit the procedure. Abortion-rights supporters are optimistic: Ohio voters rebuffed an effort largely funded by antiabortion groups this August to make constitutional amendments harder to pass. Antiabortion organizations are struggling to develop a politically attractive message and raise the $100 million or more they plan to spend next year. 

An Ohio ballot measure, if passed, would enshrine in the state constitution the right to have an abortion throughout much of pregnancy. 
In Virginia, Democrats trying to hold on to control of the state Senate and flip the Republican house of delegates have made abortion the heart of their advertising campaigns, far outpacing other topics such as healthcare, guns and the economy. 

Portraying themselves as a crucial block on potential restrictions or a total ban in a state led by Republican Gov. Glenn Youngkin, Democratic candidates have aired more than 38,000 abortion-relation spots at a cost of roughly $14.5 million, an analysis by AdImpact shows. By contrast, abortion barely registers as a topic in Republican ads, which instead largely focus on crime and policing.

One of the most frequently aired ads in recent weeks features Democratic House candidate Josh Cole saying, “If you listen to her story, a woman facing an impossible decision to have an abortion, you’d know taking away her right to control her own body is just wrong.”

That sort of abortion-rights echo chamber means that already well-funded groups are benefiting from a message that is being amplified broadly in the Democratic Party. Before the fall of Roe, Democrats had a far less cohesive approach to talking about abortion access, often preferring to skip the topic altogether.

One place to see that increased confidence is in heavily Republican Kentucky, where Democratic Gov. Andy Beshear is seeking re-election this November.  The end of Roe triggered a Kentucky law that bans abortion except when a doctor deems the woman’s life to be at risk. But last November, by a margin of 4 percentage points, voters rejected a ballot measure that would have explicitly stated that the Kentucky constitution doesn’t protect a right to an abortion. Emboldened by that voter feedback, Beshear has repeatedly criticized his opponent, Republican Attorney General Daniel Cameron, for defending the state’s abortion ban in the courts, and called him out for refusing to clearly answer whether he believes abortion should be legal for victims of rape and incest.  Democrats are portraying themselves as a crucial block on potential abortion restrictions or a total ban in Virginia, a state led by Republican Gov. Glenn Youngkin. PHOTO: VALERIE PLESCH FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
In one of Beshear’s campaign ads, an Owensboro, Ky., woman says she was raped by her stepfather at age 12. “Anyone who believes there should be no exceptions for rape and incest could never understand what it’s like to stand in my shoes,” she says. “I’m speaking out because women and girls need to have options. Daniel Cameron would give us none.”

For 2024, President Biden’s re-election campaign is already highlighting Democrats’ commitment to protecting abortion rights. One of his first campaign ads included audio of former President Trump saying, “I’m the one that got rid of Roe v. Wade” and advocating punishment for women who get abortions. 

Trump, who has a commanding lead over other GOP primary candidates, has recently advised Republicans not to take a hard line against abortion because that makes it difficult to win elections. He called Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis’s decision to sign a six-week abortion ban this April “a terrible thing.” Voters have grown more supportive of legalized abortions since the Dobbs decision, polls by The Wall Street Journal and others have found. Some surveys also show that Americans are open to restricting abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy. The Ohio constitutional amendment would protect the right to abortion up to the point that a fetus can live outside the womb, generally at about 23 weeks of pregnancy. 

Republican supermajorities in the general assembly passed a six-week ban in 2019, GOP Gov. Mike DeWine quickly signed it into law, and it briefly went into effect when the Supreme Court issued its Dobbs decision last summer.  

The law has been blocked in court for most of the last year, but the Ohio Supreme Court this fall heard arguments about whether to allow the ban to go into effect. A decision is expected in the coming months. As in other states with ballot contests, the abortion-rights side has outspent antiabortion groups in Ohio. The gulf became especially pronounced between Sept. 9 and Oct. 18, when the abortion-rights coalition spent $26.2 million to the antiabortion coalition’s $9.1 million, campaign finance reports show. Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear, a Democrat running for re-election, has repeatedly criticized his GOP opponent for defending the state’s abortion ban. PHOTO: TIMOTHY D. EASLEY/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Planned Parenthood and other abortion-rights groups have said they have seen a fundraising boom, especially from small donors, in the aftermath of the Dobbs decision. 

Susan B. Anthony and other antiabortion groups depend more heavily on large givers, including the Catholic Church and Richard Uihlein, a billionaire conservative who founded an Illinois-based industrial shipping company. Uihlein has put $4 million into the Ohio fight alone, state campaign finance reports show.

Most of the national groups on both sides of the issue are nonprofits that report top-line fundraising information only years later and often don’t disclose donors at all. Nonetheless, it has become clear that the abortion-rights advocates are better-funded. In Michigan, the lead group supporting last year’s ballot-initiative to protect abortion in the state constitution spent about $43 million while the coalition opposing it spent about $21 million, according to state campaign finance reports. The constitutional amendment there succeeded by a 13-percentage-point margin. The issue helped animate Democratic voters, who re-elected Gov. Gretchen Whitmer and elected enough Democratic legislators to give the party a majority in both chambers for the first time in four decades. From a high-stakes legal battle over the abortion pill mifepristone, to states debating their own legislation, WSJ’s Laura Kusisto highlights where abortion access stands now and what could come next. Photo Illustration: Preston Jessee
Susan B. Anthony and its allies said they spent about $78 million during last year’s midterm elections, about half of the estimated $150 million Planned Parenthood and other pro-choice groups spent.

“We have to do better and we will,” Dannenfelser said of raising and spending money.

Ellen Barrosse, a donor to Susan B. Anthony and former Republican National Committeewoman from Delaware, said her relief after the Dobbs decision was quickly replaced by fear when Kansas voters rejected an abortion ban. She said she doesn’t think other donors realize yet how much the antiabortion movement stands to lose.

“I feel very strongly that we’re heading toward a moment when people who care about this issue are going to wake up and say, ‘oh my gosh, what happened?’” she said. “Donors have to wake up now instead of waiting until next November.”



Article: 17
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Democratic Gov. Andy Beshear Re-Elected in Kentucky, and Democrats Have Big Night in Virginia
Author: Scott Calvert, Arian Campo-Flores and Jimmy Vielkind 
Publication_Date: November 8, 2023 01:31 am ET
Article_Content: The victory in a deep-red state is one of several races Tuesday offering an early read of the nation’s electoral mood before the 2024 presidential contest. Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear speaking at a rally in Louisville after being elected to a second term on Tuesday. PHOTO: TIMOTHY D. EASLEY/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Democratic Gov. Andy Beshear won re-election in Kentucky, beating back a strong challenge from his Republican opponent in a deeply conservative state—despite efforts by the GOP to yoke him to President Biden’s sagging approval ratings.

Meanwhile in Virginia, the Democratic Party’s abortion-rights message fueled victories that gave it full control of the legislature in Richmond. Together with Beshear’s victory, which showed Democrats can find strength in Trump country, the results gave an early read on the electorate’s mood heading into the 2024 presidential campaign.

“We have thwarted MAGA Republicans’ attempt to take total control of our government and our bodies,” said Virginia Sen. Mamie Locke, who chairs the Democratic Caucus.


Virginia Democrats captured the 21 seats needed to retain its state Senate majority, according to a Wall Street Journal tally of races called by the AP, and they won the 51 seats needed to wrest the majority from Republicans in the House of Delegates.

The results signaled the party’s message on abortion was still a winner. Abortion was also on the ballot in Ohio, where voters approved a measure to enshrine abortion rights in the state’s constitution.

Elsewhere, in New Jersey, another state where the parties battled for control of the state legislature, a Democratic incumbent held a key district and the party was on track to keeping its statehouse majority. And in a widely expected outcome, Mississippi’s Republican Gov. Tate Reeves defeated Democrat Brandon Presley, a distant cousin of Elvis Presley, the AP projected. The Virginia races were closely watched because a Republican-led legislature would have enabled Gov. Glenn Youngkin, who some GOP donors hope will make a late, long-shot entry into the party’s 2024 presidential nominating contest, to pass conservative policies in areas such as abortion, taxes and education.

Democrats made abortion access their top issue, campaigning in support of existing state law that allows the procedure until around 26 weeks. Republicans embraced Youngkin’s call for a ban on the procedure after 15 weeks, with exceptions for rape, incest or to protect the mother’s life, while painting Democrats as soft on crime and out of touch with parents on education policy.

“This was an election about choice,” said Democratic political consultant Ben Tribbett. He said Democrats had focused on abortion access ever since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June 2022. Youngkin’s effort to change the conversation by highlighting his proposed 15-week ban backfired, Tribbett said, adding: “He was talking about an issue that really favored us.”  Republican pollster Robert Cahaly said he thought the Democrats’ message was effective because the party’s candidates consistently characterized it as a ban.

“You hear the word ‘ban,’ ‘ban,’ ‘ban,’” said Cahaly, who polled for Youngkin in 2021. “Republicans have got to learn to articulate this better. And the problem is the Democrats are very good at spinning it and putting their money where their mouth is.”

Still, Cahaly said he didn’t think failing to win a trifecta in Richmond would tarnish Youngkin’s political future, even though the governor campaigned hard for Republicans across the state. “It’s a minor setback,” he said. While Republicans ran on other issues like the economy, Youngkin had hoped to show the party how to win on an abortion message. “We wanted to be really clear that I support a bill to protect life at 15 weeks,” Youngkin told CNN on Tuesday.


Virginia Gov. Glenn Youngkin during a campaign stop at a polling location in Bristow, Va., on Tuesday. PHOTO: AL DRAGO/BLOOMBERG NEWS
In the run-up to Tuesday’s elections, several suburban districts emerged as battlegrounds, including a Senate district in southeastern Virginia that includes Williamsburg and Yorktown.

Concerns about GOP efforts to curb abortion access motivated Les McCorkle of Williamsburg, a self-described independent voter, to cast a ballot for Democratic Sen. T. Montgomery “Monty” Mason, who was seeking re-election in the closely watched race.

“It should be a woman’s right. It’s her body,” said McCorkle, a retired Army command sergeant major. The 61-year-old said the 15-week limit backed by Republicans would be overly restrictive.

Registered Republican Teresa Woodward, who voted for Mason’s Republican challenger, former Sheriff J.D. “Danny” Diggs, said GOP calls for a 15-week ban represented a reasonable compromise. And at any rate, for Woodward, abortion ranks below other concerns like crime and the economy.


Supporters celebrated as Ohio voters approved a constitutional amendment that guarantees the right to abortion and other forms of reproductive healthcare. PHOTO: SUE OGROCKI/ASSOCIATED PRESS
“We’re all struggling right now,” said Woodward, 42, who lives in Yorktown and owns a contracting business with her husband. “Any tax that can be lowered is obviously appreciated.”

As of about 1 a.m. Eastern, the race between Diggs and Mason was too close to call.

In New Jersey, Republicans were hoping for a repeat of a 2021 red wave that swept former Democratic State Senate President Steve Sweeney out of office. Going into Tuesday, Democrats held a 25-15 majority in the Senate and a 46-34 majority in the General Assembly.

GOP candidates campaigned against recently adopted sexual-education learning standards and Democratic Gov. Phil Murphy’s support of offshore wind development. Energy company Ørsted last month canceled plans for the state’s first offshore wind farm, citing higher costs. Democratic incumbent Sen. Vin Gopal won re-election despite relentless GOP attacks about wind energy and sex education. Gopal and other Democrats have emphasized their support for abortion rights and several property-tax relief programs.

Ashley Koning, director of the Eagleton Center for Public Interest Polling at Rutgers University, said a survey taken over the weekend showed 40% of voters named economic concerns as their top issue.

“It tells us that even if we’re hearing these loud voices or anecdotal voices—and even if they’re coming across as the strongest thread of an election cycle—it doesn’t mean they’re representative of the electorate as a whole,” she said.

Republican gubernatorial candidate Daniel Cameron conceded the race during an election night watch party in Louisville, Ky., on Tuesday. PHOTO: JAMES CRISP/ASSOCIATED PRESS
In Kentucky, Beshear, 45, faced Daniel Cameron, the state’s first Black attorney general and a rising GOP star. The AP projected Beshear had won; Cameron conceded in a Tuesday night speech.

Beshear went after Cameron on the abortion issue, criticizing him for supporting current law in the state that bans virtually all abortions. The Democrat ran an ad that went viral featuring a woman who was raped as a 12-year-old and asserted that Cameron would force someone in that situation to have the baby. Cameron seemed to modify his position during the campaign, saying he would sign a bill with rape and incest exceptions if it passed the legislature.

“It was a victory that sends a loud, clear message, a message that candidates should run for something and not against someone,” Beshear said at his election party in Louisville. The Supreme Court has some really controversial cases on its docket—including whether domestic abusers should have access to guns and whether the abortion pill should be legal. They all came from one lower court: the Fifth Circuit. WSJ explains why. Photo illustration: Madeline Marshall
Recent polling showed the race tightening to a dead heat, after a string of surveys this year gave Beshear an edge. Beshear—whose father, Steve Beshear, was a popular two-term Democratic governor from 2007 to 2015—benefited from a bigger campaign war chest and a spending advantage on the airwaves. He pitched himself to voters as a moderate who is focused on all Kentuckians’ needs, regardless of party, and who presided over a period of strong economic performance.

Cameron challenged that , casting Beshear as a liberal extremist allied with President Biden and out of touch with Kentucky values. Boosting Cameron’s chances were Republicans’ voter-registration advantage, which they gained for the first time last year, and his endorsement by former President Donald Trump, who is more popular in Kentucky than Biden.

In a contentious campaign in Mississippi, Reeves and Presley presented sharply different views of the state’s economy. Reeves said that the state of about three million people was on the upswing with record-low unemployment. Presley said the state government had ignored the needs of the poor and middle class while Republican leaders have been embroiled in scandals. The GOP has held the Mississippi governor’s office continuously since 2004.





Article: 18
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion Pills to Be Available More Widely Under New FDA Rules
Author: Liz Essley Whyte 
Publication_Date: January 3, 2023 09:23 pm ET
Article_Content: The agency expanded access to a drug that induces abortion, allowing bricks-and-mortar pharmacies to dispense the pills for the first time.Appeared in the Invalid date, print edition as 'FDA Widens Access to Abortion Pills' Mifepristone, sold as a generic or under the brand name Mifeprex, is used in combination with misoprostol in a medication abortion regimen. The Food and Drug Administration expanded access to a drug that induces abortion, allowing bricks-and-mortar pharmacies to dispense the pills for the first time.  Under the changes the agency issued Tuesday, any pharmacy can complete and sign a short form to become certified to provide the so-called abortion pill, not just the handful of mail-order pharmacies that were permitted to ship prescriptions during the pandemic. The moves won’t change the availability of abortion for many women. A dozen states ban abortion throughout pregnancy, and 18 require a physician to be physically present with a patient to prescribe abortion pills, effectively banning telehealth for abortions, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a nonprofit that tracks abortion statistics and supports abortion rights. More doctors, however, may sign up to be certified to prescribe abortion pills because they will no longer need to stock and dispense the medication as well. Some women who are concerned a family member or roommate The action will also likely deepen tensions between abortion supporters and opponents over access to the drug, which many women seeking to end their pregnancies have turned to, especially after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade last year. “At a time when people across the country are struggling to obtain abortion-care services this modification is critically important to expanding access to medication abortion services,” said Danco Laboratories LLC, one of the companies that makes the pill. The abortion pill, called mifepristone, is sold as a generic or under the brand name Mifeprex. It is also sometimes known as RU-486. It works by blocking a hormone necessary to sustain pregnancy. Before the pandemic, women could get the pill only if they went to certain healthcare settings, such as a doctor’s office. During the pandemic, the FDA allowed doctors to prescribe the pill via telehealth and allowed certified mail-order pharmacies to send it to patients. Medical Abortions: The Science Behind How Abortion Pills Work After the Supreme Court decision that overturned Roe v. Wade, attention has turned to abortion pills. WSJ’s Daniela Hernandez explains how misoprostol and mifepristone work together to terminate a pregnancy, as well as the potential side effects of a medical abortion. Illustration: David Fang The agency said in late 2021 that it would permit telehealth abortion to continue permanently, though some states ban the practice. Women seeking an abortion by pill take mifepristone followed by misoprostol, which causes uterine contractions. The FDA says the regimen is safe and effective up to 10 weeks in pregnancy. Most abortions in the U.S. happen via the pill, according to the Guttmacher Institute. Several organizations that mail abortion pills, sometimes to women in states with abortion bans, have seen shipments increase since the Supreme Court’s latest abortion decision.Aid Access, a nonprofit based in Europe that mails pills worldwide, even to states with abortion bans, said it is receiving about 4,000 requests for abortion pills a month from the U.S. In addition to broadening access to bricks-and-mortar pharmacies, the FDA’s action cemented its earlier decision to allow telehealth abortions. The agency ended a requirement that the pill must be prescribed in person and affirmed that mail-order pharmacies could dispense the medication if certified. The FDA made the latest changes to access to mifepristone by sending letters to manufacturers, approving their plans to alter the drugs’ safety restrictions. The agency also updated a page on its website. “This has been a niche product for so long, and now we’re really on the cusp of making it mainstream,” said Kirsten Moore, director of the Expanding Medication Abortion Access Project, a nonprofit that supports abortion rights. Abortion opponents said the changes should be rolled back. “State lawmakers and Congress must stand as a bulwark against the Biden administration’s pro-abortion extremism. We hope to see the FDA do its job to protect the lives of women and put an end to chemical abortions,” said Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of SBA Pro-Life America, an antiabortion group. Even before the FDA’s moves, mifepristone was poised to be at the center of abortion battles this year. Some state legislatures are expected to debate bills restricting or defending access to the drug. A Missouri bill, for example, would make bringing abortion-inducing drugs into the state a felony. Abortion opponents sued the FDA in federal court late last year, seeking to overturn mifepristone’s approval. Experts expect to see more lawsuits over potential conflicts between the FDA’s power to regulate drugs and the states’ power to regulate the practice of medicine. Also on Tuesday, the Justice Department issued an opinion saying that abortion pills can be sent through the U.S. mail, as long as the sender doesn’t intend them to be used unlawfully. The U.S. Postal Service and the Department of Health and Human Services had asked the Justice Department to clarify an 1873 law, which had been invoked by Mississippi’s attorney general in a lawsuit last year, that prohibits mailing items that can be used to produce abortions.




Article: 19
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: What the Supreme Court’s Decision Means for Abortion Pills
Author: Dominique Mosbergen
Publication_Date: Updated April 21, 2023 7:43 pm ET
Article_Content: Medication abortion accounts for more than half of procedures nationwide. The Supreme Court on April 21 preserved access to a pill used in most abortions in the U.S., ruling to allow mifepristone to remain on the market as the legal battle over the drug continues.

The high court blocked an order by the Fifth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals that would have significantly affected the way mifepristone is used and dispensed for abortions. The Biden administration and Danco Laboratories LLC, which sells the drug under the brand name Mifeprex, had filed an emergency appeal to the Supreme Court, asking it to suspend the lower-court order while litigation continues.

The fight over mifepristone is the biggest abortion-related case since the Supreme Court voted to overturn Roe v. Wade last summer. More than a dozen states have passed near-total abortion bans in the aftermath of the Supreme Court decision. Several states remain in legal battles over abortion access.

More patients have sought abortion-inducing drugs from channels outside the formal medical system, including websites selling unapproved medication, since the overturning of Roe v. Wade, reproductive-health experts said.

What happens to access to abortion pills now?

Access to mifepristone is unchanged for now in states where abortion is allowed. The Fifth Circuit is scheduled to hear arguments in the case in mid-May. The case could return to the Supreme Court later in the year.

U.S. District Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk in Amarillo, Texas, ruled on April 7 to temporarily suspend the Food and Drug Administration’s approval of mifepristone. The Fifth Circuit later blocked part of Judge Kacsmaryk’s order and voted to retain FDA approval of mifepristone for abortions up to about seven weeks of pregnancy. The drug had previously been approved for use up to about 10 weeks of pregnancy.

The appellate court also rolled back other earlier efforts by the government to loosen access to mifepristone. Under the court’s ruling, mifepristone couldn’t be sent to patients through the mail and required three in-person doctor’s visits.

Reproductive-health experts said the restrictions would significantly affect access to abortions. The Supreme Court suspended the Fifth Circuit’s order, preserving the status quo of how mifepristone can be used and dispensed.

Amid the earlier uncertainty over mifepristone, abortion providers and clinics said they were considering the best options for patients, including alternative medication-abortion regimens.

What is medication abortion?

Medication abortion, also known as medical abortion or plan C, involves the administration of so-called abortion pills to terminate a pregnancy. Patients obtain the pills from a prescribing clinician or from online pharmacies and can take the medications in a clinical setting or at home.

In the U.S., medication abortion is approved by the FDA for up to 10 weeks of pregnancy. Though their efficacy decreases as gestational age increases, abortion pills can be safe and effective beyond the 10-week mark, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. In some countries, including the U.K., abortion pills are used to terminate pregnancies of up to 24 weeks. For later-term abortions, the pills are administered in clinical settings.

A two-drug regimen of mifepristone and misoprostol is the gold standard for safe and effective medication abortions, according to ACOG. Misoprostol alone can be used to terminate pregnancies and is an acceptable option if mifepristone is unavailable, ACOG said. The misoprostol-only regimen is less effective than the two-drug option, research shows.

In 2020, about 98% of medication abortions in the U.S. used the two-medication regimen of mifepristone and misoprostol, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a policy group that supports abortion rights and tracks abortion statistics.

In the combination regimen, a single dose of mifepristone is followed by a course or several courses—depending on the number of weeks of pregnancy—of misoprostol pills. The regimen is safe and highly effective, reproductive health experts say, with efficacy rates of 95% if administered at 10 weeks of pregnancy or earlier.

In the U.S., mifepristone is sold under the brand name Mifeprex, manufactured by Danco Laboratories, a pharmaceutical distributor based in New York, and Korlym, made by Silicon Valley-based Corcept Therapeutics. Korlym isn’t prescribed or marketed for abortion in the U.S. and is approved by the FDA only for the treatment of Cushing’s syndrome, a hormonal disorder. A generic version of the drug, also known as RU-486, was approved by the FDA in 2019 and is distributed by GenBioPro Inc., a Nevada-based pharmaceutical company.

Costs for a medication abortion vary by state and aren’t always covered by insurance. The combination regimen can cost up to $750, according to Planned Parenthood. U.S. telehealth providers including Hey Jane, Just the Pill and Choix charge $350 or less for a medication abortion, including pills and a medical consultation.


In the U.S., medication abortion had been approved by the FDA for up to 10 weeks of pregnancy. 
What is a one-pill abortion?

A misoprostol-only regimen has been used internationally for decades and is considered safe and effective, though it has a lower rate of efficacy compared with the combination regimen, reproductive-health experts said.

The misoprostol-only regimen has an efficacy rate of upward of 80% when administered during the first trimester of pregnancy, studies have shown.

About 0.7% of people using misoprostol alone to induce abortions were hospitalized or received blood transfusions related to the procedures, according to a 2019 meta-analysis.

Patients take several doses of misoprostol to terminate a pregnancy. Side effects such as nausea, diarrhea and cramping can be more severe with the misoprostol-only regimen, compared with the two-medication regimen, physicians said.

Misoprostol is available as a generic drug and under the brand name Cytotec, which is manufactured by Pfizer Inc.

How common is the use of abortion pills, or medication abortion?

Medication abortion accounted for 54% of abortions in the U.S. in 2020, according to the Guttmacher Institute. Since 2000, when the FDA approved mifepristone, a steadily increasing proportion of patients have chosen medication abortions. Some 37% of U.S. abortions were medication abortions in 2017, up from 14% in 2005.

How do abortion pills work? How long do they take to work?

Mifepristone blocks the hormone progesterone, which is needed to sustain a pregnancy. Misoprostol causes uterine contractions and bleeding. Physicians say the experience is similar to a miscarriage, and typically involves several hours of heavy bleeding and cramping.

In rare cases where an abortion isn’t completed, an additional dose of misoprostol can be taken. While unlikely, an in-clinic procedure might be necessary if multiple rounds of misoprostol are ineffective.
In the U.S., abortion pills require a prescription from a healthcare provider. 
How is medication abortion different from the morning-after pill?

While medication abortion terminates pregnancy, the morning-after pill, or emergency contraception, helps to prevent pregnancy by suppressing ovulation and curbing implantation. There are three types of emergency contraception pills: progestin-only pills such as levonorgestrel (sold under the brand name Plan B, among others), ulipristal (brand named Ella) and combined emergency contraception pills that consist of ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel.

Are abortion pills safe and effective?

Yes. Studies have shown the two-medication abortion regimen to be safer than widely used drugs including acetaminophen, penicillin and Viagra. Less than 0.4% of patients using mifepristone and misoprostol to terminate their pregnancies were hospitalized or required blood transfusions, according to a 2013 scientific review of the efficacy and safety of the two-medication regimen.

Research has shown the misoprostol-only regimen to be similarly safe.

Common side effects of medication abortions include bleeding, cramping, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache and dizziness. The symptoms are typically short-lived and usually abate after a day or two.

The additional risk to patients taking abortion pills at home is minimal, so long as the medication is acquired from reliable sources, said Nisha Verma, an obstetrician-gynecologist and ACOG fellow.

“However, it is important that people taking medications at home have access to safe, nonjudgmental, and supportive care within the formal medical system if they need it at any point,” Dr. Verma said. “People who do have questions or concerns before, during or after a self-managed abortion should be able to safely and confidently get the care that they need.”

Following a medication abortion, patients experiencing prolonged fever and severe cramping—that doesn’t resolve with over-the-counter painkillers—or have continued symptoms of pregnancy should seek medical care.

According to ACOG, there are a small minority of patients for whom medication abortion isn’t recommended, including those with ectopic pregnancies and chronic adrenal failure. In cases of ectopic pregnancy, a medical emergency in which a fertilized egg implants outside the uterus, patients can either be treated with a medication called methotrexate or undergo surgery. For other at-risk patients, in-clinic procedures would be the only abortion option available.


Medication abortion accounted for 54% of abortions in the U.S. in 2020. 
Do you need a prescription? Where can I get an abortion pill?

In the U.S., abortion pills require a prescription from a healthcare provider. The FDA had previously required patients to pick up mifepristone in person from a clinical setting. The agency lifted that restriction in April 2021 and allowed abortion pills to be sent by mail. In January, the FDA passed a measure allowing bricks-and-mortar pharmacies to also dispense mifepristone.

The Fifth Circuit’s order sought to temporarily reinstate some earlier restrictions, including requiring in-person doctor visits to obtain the drug. The Supreme Court has lifted those restrictions for now.

Patients can buy mifepristone and misoprostol without a prescription from online pharmacies based overseas. International health providers, including Aid Access, connect U.S. patients to physicians in Europe and mail them abortion pills from outside the country. The FDA has said that the online sale of abortion pills that aren’t regulated by the agency is a violation of U.S. law.

“Healthcare providers based internationally may feel more insulated” from potential legal ramifications in the U.S., said Julia Kaye, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union Reproductive Freedom Project.

The safety of these imported medications is also not guaranteed. Plan C, an abortion-pill advocacy group, has a pill-finding guide on its website, organized by state. For each provider listed, Plan C highlights any potential legal or safety risks.

Are states that support abortion rights thinking of expanding access to abortion pills?

Lawmakers in several states, including New York, California and Connecticut, have enacted legislation aimed at strengthening abortion protections.

In November, California, Michigan and Vermont became the first states to enshrine protections for reproductive rights in their constitutions after voters approved the changes.

Washington Gov. Jay Inslee said on April 4 that the state had purchased a three-year supply of mifepristone—about 30,000 doses—in anticipation of a potential disruption to access.



Article: 20
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion Is on the Ballot in Five States in Midterm Elections
Author: Jason FrenchFollow
Publication_Date: Updated Nov. 9, 2022 9:51 am ET
Article_Content: Voters in California, Michigan, Vermont, Kentucky and Montana weigh in on proposed measures. In the 2022 midterms, voters in five states will decide on ballot measures addressing abortion—the most on record for a single year, according to Ballotpedia. Voters passed measures guaranteeing abortion access in California, Michigan and Vermont. Kentucky are deciding if the state’s constitution should be amended to declare that it doesn’t protect the right to an abortion. Montana is asking voters whether to require medical care and treatment for infants born alive after an attempted abortion.

In August, Kansas voters rejected a proposed state constitutional amendment that would have ended protections for abortion.

California

California’s Proposition 1 is expected to pass in the heavily Democratic state and was part of a robust legislative package to ensure California remains a haven for people seeking abortion services. Legislators placed the measure to amend the constitution on the Nov. 8 ballot just days after the Supreme Court ruled in June that states could decide whether to allow abortion.
A yes vote supports amending the state constitution to prohibit the state from interfering with or denying an individual’s reproductive freedom, which includes a right to an abortion and a right to contraceptives.

A no vote opposes this amendment.

Kentucky voters are deciding whether to amend the state constitution to declare outright that it doesn’t protect the right to an abortion. The state’s trigger ban, which bans nearly all abortions, took effect after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade.

A yes vote supports amending the Kentucky constitution to say that nothing in the state constitution creates a right to an abortion or requires government funding for abortion.

A no vote opposes amending the constitution.

Michigan voters will decide whether to enshrine abortion rights in their state constitution, after the Michigan Supreme Court voted 5-2 that an abortion-access initiative must be included on the ballot after a dispute over a minor technical issue. Michigan has a 1931 law banning nearly all abortions that had been largely dormant for the last 50 years, but the referendum will help determine whether that law can once again be enforced.

A yes vote would support providing a state constitutional right to reproductive freedom, which is defined as the right to make and effectuate decisions about all matters relating to pregnancy, including but not limited to prenatal care, childbirth, postpartum care, contraception, sterilization, abortion care, miscarriage management and infertility care.

Voters will decide on a referendum that raises the possibility of criminal charges for healthcare providers unless they take “all medically appropriate and reasonable actions to preserve the life” of a fetus born alive, including after an attempted abortion—a rare occurrence, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

A yes vote supports this ballot measure to require medical care to be provided to infants born alive after an induced labor, caesarean section, attempted abortion or another method, and establishes a $50,000 fine and/or 20 years in prison as the maximum penalty for violating the law.

A no vote opposes passing this law.

Voters will have final say on the amendment, known as the Right to Personal Reproductive Autonomy Amendment, or Proposition 5. The proposal would establish a “right to personal reproductive autonomy,” which would include protections around abortion, birth-control access and sterilization.

A yes vote supports amending the Vermont constitution to add language protecting the right to personal reproductive autonomy and prohibiting government infringement unless justified by a compelling state interest.

A no vote opposes amending the constitution.




Article: 21
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Supreme Court’s Abortion Decision Sparks Immediate Action From States
Author: Laura Kusisto and Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date:June 24, 2022 08:31 pm ET
Article_Content: After Roe v. Wade was overruled, Republican state officials pressed ahead with tight abortion restrictions. Crowds and lawmakers reacted after the Supreme Court eliminated the constitutional right to an abortion by overturning Roe v. Wade. Photo: Allison Shelley for The Wall Street Journal
The Supreme Court’s decision overruling Roe v. Wade triggered immediate responses across the U.S., as conservative states moved forward with new abortion restrictions, some clinics suspended service and advocates on both sides of the abortion debate girded for new state-level battles.

More than 20 states were poised to ban most abortions if Roe was overturned. Some of those prohibitions took effect right away, while others may take time as state officials sort out both practical and legal details.

Minutes after the Supreme Court announced its decision, Missouri Attorney General Eric Schmitt, a Republican, said he issued an opinion allowing implementation of a state abortion ban, previously adopted by the legislature, that was triggered once the justices overruled Roe. The state law doesn’t make exceptions for pregnancies that result from rape or incest and makes performing an abortion punishable by five to 15 years in prison.


South Dakota’s Republican Gov. Kristi Noem said nearly all abortions were now illegal as her state’s trigger law took effect. PHOTO: JOHN RAOUX/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Missouri, he said on Twitter, “has become the most Pro Life state in America.”

South Dakota Republican Gov. Kristi Noem said nearly all abortions were now illegal as her state’s trigger law took effect. Planned Parenthood’s clinic in Sioux Falls, the state’s only abortion clinic, stopped providing abortions before the decision. Louisiana Attorney General Jeff Landry likewise said his state’s trigger law banning most abortions has taken effect.

In total, 13 states have trigger laws that were designed to ban most abortions quickly if the Supreme Court eliminated the constitutional right to an abortion.

“In the very short term there’s going to be a lot of confusion,” said Rachel Rebouché, interim dean of the Beasley School of Law at Temple University.

Abortion providers across the country rushed to accommodate to new laws, consulting with legal counsel on their next steps. It wasn’t immediately clear how many clinics stopped providing abortions Friday.

“We’re all scrambling,” said Jay Thibodeau, communications director for the Abortion Care Network. “This is chaotic.”

Among the abortion clinics halting the procedure was Hope Medical Group for Women in Shreveport, La., said Kathaleen Pittman, the clinic’s administrator. The clinic—one of three in Louisiana—sits across the border from Texas and had seen an influx in patients after the Lone Star State implemented a ban on abortion after six weeks of pregnancy last year.

Ruling Overturning Roe v. Wade Sets Off Celebrations, Protests
Protesters gathered in Columbus, Ohio, in support of abortion rights after the Supreme Court ruling on Friday.

Protesters gathered in Columbus, Ohio, in support of abortion rights after the Supreme Court ruling on Friday.Barbara J. Perenic/The Columbus Dispatch/Associated Press

“We have devastated patients already here today so we are concentrating on them and assisting them with their options,” Ms. Pittman said in an email shortly after the court’s decision.

In Kentucky, EMW Women’s Surgical Center stopped providing abortions on the advice of its lawyers. The state has an abortion ban that is designed to take effect immediately.

“We have advised them to stop providing all care until our legal team has the time to analyze the entire opinion and how it relates to existing federal and Kentucky laws,” said Samuel Crankshaw, a spokesman for ACLU of Kentucky. He said his organization plans to file a lawsuit in state court arguing the state’s constitution provides protections for abortion.

Kentucky Republican Attorney General Daniel Cameron said the Supreme Court’s decision marks “a new era.”

In states where the legal landscape is unclear, some clinics said they had stopped providing abortions for now. Wisconsin has a 1849 law banning nearly all abortions with an exception for the safety of the pregnant woman. Democratic Gov. Tony Evers previously said that the state’s attorney general would challenge the law if Roe were overturned. But before the court’s ruling, Planned Parenthood clinics in the state already had stopped scheduling abortions for after June 25, because of the existing state law.

Meanwhile, more liberal states took defensive action to protect women seeking abortions and providers who care for them. The governors of California, Oregon and Washington said Friday they were launching a multistate commitment to safeguard abortion access that includes protecting patients who travel from states where it is illegal. The states will also discourage local law enforcement from cooperating with out-of-state investigations and arrests related to abortion.

In Massachusetts, Gov. Charlie Baker, a Republican, signed an executive order Friday similarly aimed at protecting reproductive-health services, including for women who come from out of state to seek the procedure.

Coalition for Life volunteers block access to a Planned Parenthood clinic in St. Louis on Friday. 
Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker, a Democrat, said he would call a special session of the state’s legislature to add more protections for abortion rights. The state is one of more than a dozen others that have enshrined protections for abortion in recent years, and clinics there anticipate an influx of patients from states with new bans.

In Michigan, Democratic Gov. Gretchen Whitmer sought to expedite legal efforts to overturn a 1931 state law banning abortion. In May, a state judge temporarily suspended enforcement of the law. Ms. Whitmer asked the Michigan Supreme Court to immediately consider whether the state’s constitution protects abortion. “The urgency of the moment is clear—the Michigan court must act now,” she said.

In Washington, D.C., Attorney General Merrick Garland called the ruling “a devastating blow to reproductive freedom,” but emphasized that women have the right to travel between states to seek an abortion.

“Under bedrock constitutional principles, women who reside in states that have banned access to comprehensive reproductive care must remain free to seek that care in states where it is legal,” Mr. Garland said. “Moreover, under fundamental First Amendment principles, individuals must remain free to inform and counsel each other about the reproductive care that is available in other states.”

There are several states with minimal explicit restrictions or protections for abortion. In those states abortion is expected to remain legal, although lawmakers could move to either protect or ban the procedure, according to Elizabeth Nash, a state policy analyst at the Guttmacher Institute, a policy group that supports abortion rights and tracks national abortion statistics.

The decision prompted emotional reactions around the country, with antiabortion groups celebrating the achievement of a goal they have worked toward all their adult lives and abortion-rights advocates mourning the loss of nearly 50 years of protections they viewed as sacred. By midday Friday several hundred protesters had gathered outside the Supreme Court.

“This is a fascist ruling. This is illegitimate,” one abortion-rights protester yelled into a megaphone. “We need massive nonviolent mass outpourings of resistance across this country.”


Massachusetts Republican Gov. Charlie Baker signed an executive order Friday aimed at protecting reproductive-health services. With another megaphone, one abortion opponent stood in front of “Goodbye Roe” signs and said, “This is a day of celebration for the pro-life generation.”

With Roe’s demise in hand, antiabortion activists said they would push legislators in Republican-led states without strong existing bans to call special legislative sessions to pass new laws.

“We have built an army that tomorrow will go to state capitals around the country,” said Kristan Hawkins, president of Students for Life of America.

Indiana Gov. Eric Holcomb said in a tweet Friday that he had called the state legislature back into session for July 6.

In some Republican-led states, officials began sorting out how to revive years of abortion restrictions that had been blocked by judges because of the Supreme Court’s protections of abortion rights.

Georgia Attorney General Chris Carr, a Republican, asked a federal appeals court to reverse a decision blocking a ban on abortion after six weeks of pregnancy that the state passed in 2019.

In Ohio, a federal judge issued an order Friday allowing the state’s six-week ban to take effect. The law had been blocked by the courts for almost three years. The American Civil Liberties Union and other groups said they planned to file a new case on behalf of local abortion providers challenging the law in state court.

In moderate states including Florida, Virginia and North Carolina, Republican leaders might have to chart a more delicate path forward. In Virginia, Republican Gov. Glenn Youngkin said he has asked legislative leaders to introduce abortion legislation when the state General Assembly returns in January, suggesting he will be able to pass incremental new restrictions.

“We can build a bipartisan consensus on protecting the life of unborn children, especially when they begin to feel pain in the womb, and importantly supporting mothers and families who choose life,” he said.








Article: 22
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion-Rights Supporters Prevail in Midterm Ballot Measures
Author: Laura Kusisto and Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date: November 9, 2022 06:36 pm ET
Article_Content: Voters passed measures guaranteeing abortion access in California, Michigan and Vermont, and an antiabortion proposal in Republican-leaning Kentucky was defeated. Abortion-rights supporters in Detroit as Michigan voted to end a 1931 ban on the procedure. PHOTO: RYAN SUN/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Voters supported abortion access in a politically diverse mix of states on Tuesday, delivering victories to reproductive-rights advocates on ballot measures in Michigan, California, Vermont and Republican-leaning Kentucky.

The midterm elections provided the first national temperature-taking on voter attitudes toward abortion since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in late June, ending federal constitutional protections for the procedure. The decision returned abortion policy to the states, creating a host of new battlegrounds.

Voters in five states considered ballot measures on abortion Tuesday. Democrats also made abortion central to their campaigns in an array of races and notched victories in a number of them, including contests for governor in Michigan and Pennsylvania.

RESULTS OF ABORTION BALLOT MEASURES

Michigan voters passed a ballot measure to enshrine reproductive rights in the state constitution and re-elected Democratic Gov. Gretchen Whitmer. Democrats also took control of the state’s legislature for the first time in four decades.

Ms. Whitmer’s Republican opponent, Tudor Dixon, had called the abortion ballot measure a radical proposal.

Michigan’s referendum proposed to amend the state’s constitution to specify that “every individual has a fundamental right to reproductive freedom.” The measure nullifies a 1931 state abortion ban that was largely dormant for the past 50 years. Since the Supreme Court overturned Roe, state courts have been considering whether the Michigan law could be reinstated.

Michigan was a major focus for abortion-rights supporters because it is poised to serve as a destination for patients from nearby states, including Ohio, Indiana and Missouri, where lawmakers are seeking to ban the procedure.

Voters in California and Vermont overwhelmingly passed similar amendments to their state constitutions to include reproductive rights. Vermont’s initiative passed with 77% of the vote with nearly all votes counted, according to the AP. With 42% of California’s votes counted as of Wednesday, 65% were in support.

Both initiatives had been expected to pass in states where there are already limited restrictions on abortion.


California state Senate President Pro Tempore Toni Atkins, in glasses, hugged Jodie Hicks, CEO of Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California, at a gathering Tuesday in support of California's constitutional amendment. PHOTO: RICH PEDRONCELLI/ASSOCIATED PRESS
In Kentucky, with 98% of votes counted, 52% of voters rejected a ballot measure that sought to amend the state constitution to explicitly say that it doesn’t contain a right to abortion. The proposal failed even as Republicans won most congressional races in the state.

The measure’s failure won’t have an immediate practical effect, but its rejection leaves open the door for the state’s Supreme Court to decide that its Constitution includes a right to abortion. The court is expected to hear arguments later this month in a case challenging the state’s abortion ban.

Kentucky voters also declined to elect a vocal Republican abortion opponent who was running for the state Supreme Court.



The defeat of the ballot measure in Kentucky is likely to boost abortion-rights groups that hope direct appeals to voters can help them win Roe-like protections in at least some states where Republican supporters outnumber Democrats.


Opponents of Kentucky’s ballot measure watched Tuesday in Louisville, Ky., as results were reported. PHOTO: RYAN C. HERMENS/ASSOCIATED PRESS
The results tell a similar story to what happened in Kansas in August, where voters in the conservative-leaning state soundly rejected a proposed state constitutional amendment that would have ended protections for abortion.

Abortion rights groups said they are discussing options for ballot initiatives in other states in the coming years.

“When we can take this issue out of the hands of politicians and let the people decide directly, we can get some really exciting results,” said Rachel Sweet, the campaign manager for Protect Kentucky Access, who worked to defeat the Kentucky proposal and previously led efforts to defeat Kansas’ proposed amendment.

According to an AP VoteCast survey of more than 90,000 voters, roughly seven in 10 said abortion was an important factor they considered, while one quarter said the issue was the single most important factor in their vote.

For voters who rated abortion as their top issue, roughly 70% voted for Democrats, according to the national survey, conducted Oct. 31 through poll close on Nov. 8 by the AP-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research for The Wall Street Journal, the Associated Press and Fox News.

Abortion opponents cautioned against reading too much into the referendum results, saying they were significantly outspent by abortion-rights groups on the ballot questions.

“The pro-life movement has to do better,” said Frank Cannon, a political strategist for Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America. “The political element of the pro-life movement has to step up and that is true in every area. Without that, we’re going to be in trouble.”

Campaigning on abortion rights didn’t help some Democrats, including Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams, who lost her challenge to Republican incumbent Gov. Brian Kemp.

In Ohio, Republicans swept three races for the state’s Supreme Court. The GOP candidates had taken the position that life begins at fertilization, in response to a questionnaire from a group that opposes abortion.

A vote in Montana on a narrower abortion-related ballot measure was still too close to call Wednesday. The measure raises the possibility of criminal charges for healthcare providers unless they take “all medically appropriate and reasonable actions to preserve the life” of a fetus born alive, including after an attempted abortion—a rare occurrence, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Before the midterms, no state had adopted a constitutional amendment that enshrines protections for abortion. Sixteen states and Washington, D.C., have written abortion rights into state statutes. A constitutional amendment further protects abortion rights, supporters say. Alabama, Louisiana, Tennessee and West Virginia have adopted constitution amendments in recent years explicitly saying their state constitutions don’t protect abortion rights. ABORTION AS AN ELECTION ISSUE Abortion has become a much bigger motivating issue among Democrats since the Supreme Court ruled that there is no constitutional right to the procedure, according to a survey of about 115,000 voters, compiled by the Associated Press. See the full results of the AP VoteCast survey here.








Article: 23
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Walmart, Target Show Divergence on Companies’ Abortion Coverage
Author: Sarah Nassauer and Anna Wilde Mathews 
Publication_Date: July 1, 2022 05:14 pm ET
Article_Content: Walmart doesn’t broadly cover abortions for employees. Target does. Other companies scramble to better understand what they cover. Walmart, the biggest private employer in the U.S., says it is reviewing its abortion coverage.
Employees of Target Corp. have access to health-insurance plans that broadly cover abortion. Walmart Inc.’s WMT -0.43%decrease; red down pointing triangle health plans don’t cover an abortion unless the health of the mother is at risk or the fetus couldn’t survive birth.

The rival retailers’ policies highlight the range of coverage at the largest U.S. employers, whose health plans have come into sharper focus since last week, when the Supreme Court overturned the constitutional right to an abortion and left the question of its legality to the states. Target is among companies adding a benefit that covers travel expenses to get an abortion. Walmart says it is reviewing its abortion coverage.

The type of health-insurance plans offered by large and midsize U.S. companies tend to include some abortion benefits. A federal antidiscrimination statute requires all employers that provide health insurance to cover an abortion if the life of the mother is at risk from the pregnancy.

Around 10% of covered American workers are enrolled in plans offered by employers that specifically excluded or tightly restricted abortion coverage, according to a 2019 survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation. Now that the Supreme Court has overturned Roe v. Wade, the legal fate of abortion is left up to individual states. WSJ’s Jennifer Calfas explains where abortion access in the U.S. stands now. Photo illustration: Laura Kammermann
Large-employer plans diverge on whether employees are covered for an abortion when there isn’t a health risk in carrying the pregnancy to full term. Smaller companies tend to have a type of insurance that is subject to state laws, which may or may not allow abortion coverage as part of plans.

Around 37% of companies cover at least some form of elective abortions, according to an early June survey of 400 companies of all sizes from consultant Mercer, a unit of Marsh & McLennan Cos. The survey isn’t complete and many companies are only recently reviewing the details of their abortion coverage, said some of the Mercer executives involved in the research.

“It is hard to get firm data on what percentage of healthcare plans cover elective abortion and what don’t,” said Julie Campbell, a principal in Mercer’s Health & Benefits group. In recent days, some clients are reaching out to Mercer after discovering their abortion coverage is unintentionally narrow, she said.

Target, Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc. WBA 7.60%increase; green up pointing triangle and Amazon.com Inc. offer employee healthcare plans that cover abortion broadly, according to people familiar with the plans. Large banks and technology companies tend to cover the costs of abortion care for employees and family members under their plans, including Citigroup Inc. and JPMorgan Chase & Co. The companies are among those that have also promised to reimburse employees for travel related to abortion and other healthcare services. Target, as well as many large banks and tech companies, offer employee healthcare plans that cover abortion broadly. PHOTO: NICHOLAS KAMM/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY S
Walmart’s 2022 employee benefits document states: “Charges for procedures, services, drugs, and supplies related to abortions or termination of pregnancy are not covered, except when the health of the mother would be in danger if the fetus were carried to term, the fetus could not survive the birthing process, or death would be imminent after birth.”

Walmart, the biggest private employer in the country with around 1.7 million U.S. staffers, doesn’t cover the cost of emergency contraception such as Plan B unless prescribed by a doctor, according to the documents. Medications such as Plan B, which are intended to prevent pregnancy up to 3 days after unprotected sex, are available for purchase without a prescription.

In a memo to staff on Friday, Walmart Chief Executive Doug McMillon said the company was getting input from employees and reviewing its policies following the Supreme Court’s decision. “No matter what your position on this topic is, we want you to feel respected, valued and supported,” he wrote in the memo. “We will share details on our actions as soon as possible, recognizing that time is of the essence.”

Walmart’s policies on abortion coverage closely mirror abortion laws in Arkansas, where the retailer is based. When the Supreme Court overturned the federal right to abortion, Arkansas’s attorney general enacted a so-called trigger law that outlaws abortion in all cases except to protect the life of the mother.

Many executives didn’t pay much attention to abortion benefits until the last couple of months, after a leaked draft opinion indicated the Supreme Court was preparing to overturn Roe v. Wade, according to Laurie Sobel, associate director at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit healthcare research organization. Abortion is a relatively inexpensive benefit for a company to cover, and employees were less likely to ask about it as part of hiring as they might be for something like in vitro fertilization coverage, Ms. Sobel said. Now companies are digging into the details of their plans, she said.

Some 14% of large employers surveyed in May said they had a travel benefit in place or are planning to have one, while another 25% said they were considering it, according to responses from nearly 700 employers from a different survey conducted by benefits consultant Mercer. Employers with at least 20,000 workers were the most likely to provide a travel and lodging benefit for employees traveling to receive an abortion, the survey said.

In the U.S., the median self-pay price for a medication abortion in 2020 was $560, and the median cost of a first-trimester procedural abortion was $575, according to a study published in April in the journal Health Affairs.

Many people pay out-of-pocket for abortions, say researchers and consultants, in part because they aim to keep the procedure private from employers or because not all abortion providers take insurance.

Before the new Supreme Court decision, companies and employees navigated a patchwork of abortion healthcare coverage rules.

Many states’ Medicaid plans restrict coverage of abortion, while federal programs like Medicare pay for it under limited circumstances. States have also restricted abortion coverage in private insurance, with 11 of them banning abortion coverage in all plans they regulate, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Yet state insurance rules don’t apply to the type of coverage that is most common among midsize and large employers. Those so-called self-funded plans, in which employers pay workers’ health claims with their own money, are regulated at the federal level.










Article: 24
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Tracking Abortion in the U.S. Is About to Get Murkier
Author:  Josh Zumbrun
Publication_Date:July 8, 2022 05:30 am ET
Article_Content: The Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade makes possible a rise in what are known as self-managed abortions, for which data are harder to collect. Abortion clinics contribute to surveys on how many abortions are performed. 
The Supreme Court’s ruling eliminating the constitutional right to an abortion is sure to alter the numbers on abortion in the U.S. But we might not know by how much. Statistics on abortion are about to become unreliable at precisely the moment the public is most interested in them.

The majority opinion released last month in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization overturned Roe v. Wade, the 1973 decision that established a federal right to abortion. As a result new restrictions, including total bans, can go into effect in 22 states. And while that is expected to lead to fewer abortions, it might become hard to distinguish an actual decline from a decline in how many abortions are counted.

“When you think about accurately measuring abortion in the U.S., it was pretty difficult prior to the Dobbs decision and it’s going to become far more difficult in this rapidly evolving legal landscape,” said Lauren Ralph, associate professor at the University of California, San Francisco, an expert on abortion statistics.

The primary data source for abortion in the U.S. is the Guttmacher Institute, a policy group that supports abortion rights and tracks statistics. Since 1973 it has conducted a regular survey, now triennial, of all known facilities providing abortion in the U.S., asking how many abortions were performed.

Most clinics respond to the institute’s survey. (Many hospitals don’t, but hospitals provide relatively few abortions and state health data help fill in the gaps.)

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also compiles statistics, but researchers, including abortion-rights advocates and antiabortion groups, generally agree Guttmacher’s data are superior.

Guttmacher’s statistics “probably do a pretty good job of capturing the overall incidence or overall number,” says Jim Studnicki, vice president of data analytics at the Charlotte Lozier Institute, the research and education institute of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America. By contrast he faults the data the CDC collects from states. State data are reported inconsistently, because some states don’t report race and ethnicity—or report any data. States don’t even use a consistent definition of how many weeks along a pregnancy is. The CDC acknowledges these limitations to its data.

Most glaringly, the CDC receives and reports no data from California, while Guttmacher shows California has more abortions than any other state.

Guttmacher tallied over 900,000 abortions in clinical settings in 2019 and 2020, compared with the CDC’s 2019 estimate of 630,000.

But note that key phrase: “in clinical settings.” Even before Dobbs, a new type of abortion was on the rise outside of clinics.

The Food and Drug Administration’s approval of the drug mifepristone in 2000 made it possible to obtain abortion via medication. Medication abortions have steadily grown as a share of all abortions, but until recently occurred primarily in clinics. The Supreme Court did more than overrule Roe v. Wade and allow states to ban abortion. The court showed how it views rights that aren't explicitly mentioned in the Constitution. WSJ’s Jess Bravin explains. Illustration: Ryan Trefes
Beginning in 2018, Aid Access, a nonprofit incorporated in Austria, became the first online telemedicine service to offer medication abortion anywhere in the U.S., including in states where the procedure is otherwise banned. (For those states, Aid Access mails medication from India.) Patients have a teleconsultation online with doctors in Europe and can have the medicine shipped directly to their home. The abortion is then self-managed at home, rather than through a clinic, and therefore isn’t counted by Guttmacher.

There is evidence that women in states where abortion is restricted or banned might seek out self-managed abortion—through Aid Access, through online pharmacies based outside the U.S. or through other methods if a state’s clinics close. In these states, it will be difficult to tell how much abortion declined, if at all, unless data collection changes.

“We know in the last couple of years that reliance on self-managed abortion has increased,” said Rachel Jones, principal research scientist at Guttmacher. “That’s something we’re going to have to explore.”Abigail Aiken, an associate professor at the University of Texas, spotted that gap in the statistics. In partnership with Rebecca Gomperts, a Dutch doctor and the founder of Aid Access, she calculated that from March 2018 to March 2020, a total of 57,506 people requested self-managed medication abortion through Aid Access. (Aid Access doesn’t know exactly how many people who request medication actually take it. In a follow-up poll, 12% of recipients said they didn’t actually use the medicine.)

Her research also shows demand for Aid Access surges when abortion becomes more restricted. In September 2021, when Texas banned abortions with few exceptions after the sixth week of pregnancy, the number of abortions in Texas clinics fell by 2,347—over 50%—but Aid Access received 1,831 requests for self-managed abortion from Texas, briefly receiving 12 times as many requests as the same period a year earlier.

While data from some organizations such as Aid Access might ultimately get reported, many other abortions might not.

In 2017, Guttmacher estimated that 24% of women would have an abortion by age 45. A sizable share might end up electing self-managed abortion. In 2020, Dr. Ralph of UCSF and co-authors, based on a survey of 7,022 women aged 18 to 49, estimated 7% would attempt to self-manage an abortion, not just through an organization like Aid Access, “but other methods: herbs, over-the-counter medicines, drugs, alcohol, physical methods, some of which we know have the potential for harm and are ineffective.”

But research like hers will almost certainly become more difficult, she said. State restrictions have two effects: Women will be more likely to pursue abortions outside clinical settings, and women and providers might become less likely to talk about having or facilitating abortions, out of concern of running afoul of the new legal restrictions, she said.

“We want to know how often this is happening to understand the burden women are experiencing,” Dr. Ralph said. “At the same time, we need to move carefully in an evolving legal landscape where there’s the potential that behaviors could be criminalized.”







Article: 25
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion-Rights Supporters Prevail in Midterm Ballot Measures
Author:  Laura Kusisto and Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date:November 9, 2022 06:36 pm ET
Article_Content: Voters passed measures guaranteeing abortion access in California, Michigan and Vermont, and an antiabortion proposal in Republican-leaning Kentucky was defeated. Abortion-rights supporters in Detroit as Michigan voted to end a 1931 ban on the procedure. 
Voters supported abortion access in a politically diverse mix of states on Tuesday, delivering victories to reproductive-rights advocates on ballot measures in Michigan, California, Vermont and Republican-leaning Kentucky.

The midterm elections provided the first national temperature-taking on voter attitudes toward abortion since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in late June, ending federal constitutional protections for the procedure. The decision returned abortion policy to the states, creating a host of new battlegrounds.

Voters in five states considered ballot measures on abortion Tuesday. Democrats also made abortion central to their campaigns in an array of races and notched victories in a number of them, including contests for governor in Michigan and Pennsylvania.

RESULTS OF ABORTION BALLOT MEASURES


Michigan voters passed a ballot measure to enshrine reproductive rights in the state constitution and re-elected Democratic Gov. Gretchen Whitmer. Democrats also took control of the state’s legislature for the first time in four decades.

Ms. Whitmer’s Republican opponent, Tudor Dixon, had called the abortion ballot measure a radical proposal.

Michigan’s referendum proposed to amend the state’s constitution to specify that “every individual has a fundamental right to reproductive freedom.” The measure nullifies a 1931 state abortion ban that was largely dormant for the past 50 years. Since the Supreme Court overturned Roe, state courts have been considering whether the Michigan law could be reinstated.

Michigan was a major focus for abortion-rights supporters because it is poised to serve as a destination for patients from nearby states, including Ohio, Indiana and Missouri, where lawmakers are seeking to ban the procedure.

Voters in California and Vermont overwhelmingly passed similar amendments to their state constitutions to include reproductive rights. Vermont’s initiative passed with 77% of the vote with nearly all votes counted, according to the AP. With 42% of California’s votes counted as of Wednesday, 65% were in support.

Both initiatives had been expected to pass in states where there are already limited restrictions on abortion.


California state Senate President Pro Tempore Toni Atkins, in glasses, hugged Jodie Hicks, CEO of Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California, at a gathering Tuesday in support of California's constitutional amendment. PHOTO: RICH PEDRONCELLI/ASSOCIATED PRESS
In Kentucky, with 98% of votes counted, 52% of voters rejected a ballot measure that sought to amend the state constitution to explicitly say that it doesn’t contain a right to abortion. The proposal failed even as Republicans won most congressional races in the state.

The measure’s failure won’t have an immediate practical effect, but its rejection leaves open the door for the state’s Supreme Court to decide that its Constitution includes a right to abortion. The court is expected to hear arguments later this month in a case challenging the state’s abortion ban.

Kentucky voters also declined to elect a vocal Republican abortion opponent who was running for the state Supreme Court. The defeat of the ballot measure in Kentucky is likely to boost abortion-rights groups that hope direct appeals to voters can help them win Roe-like protections in at least some states where Republican supporters outnumber Democrats.


Opponents of Kentucky’s ballot measure watched Tuesday in Louisville, Ky., as results were reported. PHOTO: RYAN C. HERMENS/ASSOCIATED PRESS
The results tell a similar story to what happened in Kansas in August, where voters in the conservative-leaning state soundly rejected a proposed state constitutional amendment that would have ended protections for abortion.

Abortion rights groups said they are discussing options for ballot initiatives in other states in the coming years.

“When we can take this issue out of the hands of politicians and let the people decide directly, we can get some really exciting results,” said Rachel Sweet, the campaign manager for Protect Kentucky Access, who worked to defeat the Kentucky proposal and previously led efforts to defeat Kansas’ proposed amendment.

According to an AP VoteCast survey of more than 90,000 voters, roughly seven in 10 said abortion was an important factor they considered, while one quarter said the issue was the single most important factor in their vote.

For voters who rated abortion as their top issue, roughly 70% voted for Democrats, according to the national survey, conducted Oct. 31 through poll close on Nov. 8 by the AP-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research for The Wall Street Journal, the Associated Press and Fox News.

Abortion opponents cautioned against reading too much into the referendum results, saying they were significantly outspent by abortion-rights groups on the ballot questions.

“The pro-life movement has to do better,” said Frank Cannon, a political strategist for Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America. “The political element of the pro-life movement has to step up and that is true in every area. Without that, we’re going to be in trouble.”Campaigning on abortion rights didn’t help some Democrats, including Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams, who lost her challenge to Republican incumbent Gov. Brian Kemp.

In Ohio, Republicans swept three races for the state’s Supreme Court. The GOP candidates had taken the position that life begins at fertilization, in response to a questionnaire from a group that opposes abortion.

A vote in Montana on a narrower abortion-related ballot measure was still too close to call Wednesday. The measure raises the possibility of criminal charges for healthcare providers unless they take “all medically appropriate and reasonable actions to preserve the life” of a fetus born alive, including after an attempted abortion—a rare occurrence, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Before the midterms, no state had adopted a constitutional amendment that enshrines protections for abortion. Sixteen states and Washington, D.C., have written abortion rights into state statutes. A constitutional amendment further protects abortion rights, supporters say.

Alabama, Louisiana, Tennessee and West Virginia have adopted constitution amendments in recent years explicitly saying their state constitutions don’t protect abortion rights.

ABORTION AS AN ELECTION ISSUE

Abortion has become a much bigger motivating issue among Democrats since the Supreme Court ruled that there is no constitutional right to the procedure, according to a survey of about 115,000 voters, compiled by the Associated Press. See the full results of the AP VoteCast survey here.

Percentage of respondents that said abortion played a role in how they voted





Article: 26
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Oklahoma Legislature Passes Near-Total Ban on Abortion
Author:  Laura Kusisto and Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date: April 5, 2022 06:55 pm ET
Article_Content: Abortion providers could face up to 10 years in prison if the bill is signed by Gov. Kevin Stitt. A rally Tuesday in favor of abortion rights on the steps of the Oklahoma State Capitol. PHOTO: SARAH PHIPPS/THE OKLAHOMAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Oklahoma’s Legislature on Tuesday passed a near-total ban on abortion, one of the most sweeping bans passed this year as Republican-led states test the constitutional limits of abortion rights.

The Oklahoma bill bans abortion from the beginning of pregnancy except if the life of the mother is in danger. There is no exception for rape or incest.

Under the law, an abortion provider could face up to 10 years in prison. Mothers wouldn’t face criminal penalties.

The bill passed the Oklahoma House of Representatives on Tuesday and already passed the state’s Senate last session. It now heads to the desk of Republican Gov. Kevin Stitt. If the governor signs the bill, it is expected to take effect sometime this year unless it is blocked by the courts.

The governor’s office didn’t respond to a request for comment. The governor has said he would sign any antiabortion bill that comes across his desk.

Republican-led states have passed several bills this year tightening restrictions on abortion, anticipating that the Supreme Court in the coming months could issue a decision weakening or eliminating constitutional protections established under Roe v. Wade in deciding a case from Mississippi.

Florida, Arizona and Kentucky each passed 15-week bans on abortion, mirroring the Mississippi law.

Lawmakers have also passed legislation strengthening abortion rights in anticipation of the Supreme Court decision. Colorado and New Jersey recently passed legislation establishing a right to an abortion and other types of reproductive healthcare under state statute. Voters in Vermont will cast ballots in November on a constitutional amendment establishing a right to an abortion.

Impact of Supreme Court’s Conservative Majority Begins to Emerge
The Supreme Court closed out a closely-watched term that saw its conservative majority prevail in many cases, as its impact began to take shape. WSJ’s Gerald F. Seib and Jess Bravin explain. Photo illustration: Laura Kammermann


The Oklahoma bill as written violates the constitutional protections for abortion currently laid out by the Supreme Court. Rep. Jim Olsen, the bill’s sponsor in the House, said proponents of the legislation hope that the Supreme Court’s decision in the Mississippi case will give the states more power to restrict abortion.

“We do have some hope that there is a possibility that the result would be that it would return it back to the states,” he said, referring to the Supreme Court.

Abortion-rights advocates said they plan to challenge the law. “We do still feel confident that we’ll be able to get it blocked in court,” said Emily Wales, interim president of Planned Parenthood Great Plains Votes, a regional advocacy arm.

Oklahoma legislators are considering a number of bills restricting abortion. One of those bills include an abortion ban similar to a Texas law that bars abortions at around six weeks of pregnancy and vests enforcement power with private citizens. The Texas law has so far withstood legal challenges.

Since the Texas law took effect seven months ago, Oklahoma has become one of several neighboring states for Texas patients to get an abortion.

About half of the patients at Trust Women, an independent abortion provider with a clinic in Oklahoma City, now come from Texas, compared with 10% before the Texas law took effect, said Rebecca Tong, the clinic’s co-executive director.

The newly passed legislation makes an abortion clinic’s work more challenging and stirs confusion among in-state and out-of-state patients, Ms. Tong said in an interview after the bill was passed.

“They want to make it so difficult, so stressful, so time-consuming and so expensive that we pack up and leave,” she said. “We’re not going to do that.”

Kristan Hawkins, president of Students for Life Action, a nonprofit youth organization that opposes abortion, praised the decision in Oklahoma to pass a bill that would ban abortions at all stages of pregnancy. Oklahoma’s Legislature, she said, “is acknowledging that we are valuable human beings no matter how small.”








Article: 27
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Doctors Are Rethinking Careers After States Restrict Abortions
Author:  Julie Wernau and Kris Maher 
Publication_Date: July 14, 2022 05:30 am ET
Article_Content:  Doctors who perform abortions are considering their options after the Supreme Court’s ruling leaves them unable to continue their work.Giovannina Anthony is among doctors who have rethought their careers since the Supreme Court removed constitutional protections for abortion.

An obstetrician-gynecologist, Dr. Anthony has conducted medical abortions at her clinic in Jackson, Wyo., for 17 years. She was the only abortion provider in the state before telemedicine-based startup justthepill.com.

The Supreme Court’s overturning of Roe v. Wade on June 24 has put her work in doubt. If Gov. Mark Gordon, a Republican, agrees that the decision now triggers a state law banning abortion except in cases of rape, incest or danger to the mother’s life, it will be take effect within five days. Mr. Gordon is awaiting an analysis of the Supreme Court decision by Wyoming’s attorney general, a spokesman for the governor said.

Dr. Anthony, 55, said she considered retiring early after the Supreme Court’s decision. Instead, she decided to push to keep conducting abortions in Wyoming. If the trigger law takes effect, she and other doctors said they plan to file for a court injunction against it.

“I initially felt like I had no fight left in me. Now I’m feeling a little more in fight mode,” she said. “I feel like I can make a difference. And for me, that’s a reason to stay.”


Dr. Anthony thought of retiring before reconsidering: ‘I feel like I can make a difference. And for me, that’s a reason to stay.’
The overturning of Roe v. Wade has changed the work of some doctors performing abortions and other healthcare workers involved in the procedures. In response, some of the doctors and workers are traveling to other states to practice temporarily or moving to states where abortion remains legal from states where it is now restricted. Others said they plan to stay in states curbing abortion to provide access in cases when it remains legal.

Catherine Romanos, a family doctor in Ohio, said she plans to make regular drives to Michigan to conduct abortions beginning this month. She is applying for a medical license in Michigan and Illinois, where abortion is legal. In Ohio, a law that recently took effect banned abortion after a fetal heartbeat is detected. Dr. Romanos said she is turning away patients whose pregnancies have advanced past that stage and in some cases advising them to seek an abortion in other states.

“Everything is in flux,” she said. After the Supreme Court ruling, abortions are largely unavailable in about a dozen states because of new bans or legal uncertainty. Another roughly half-dozen states could ban or restrict abortion soon. Demand for abortions has risen in states where abortion remains legal, doctors and abortion-rights advocates said.Dr. Anthony was the only abortion provider in Wyoming before telemedicine-based startup justthepill.com.
Some states that allow abortion are recruiting healthcare workers from states restricting the procedure. The Boulder Valley Women’s Health Center in Colorado has hired two medical assistants from Texas in recent months, said medical director Kelly Peters. The center needs more staff to handle an increase in prospective patients, Dr. Peters said.

“We had 12 phone calls within the first hour or two after the decision came down,” she said.

Choices, an abortion clinic in Memphis, Tenn., said it is opening a second location three hours away in Carbondale, Ill., a state where providers have said they are conducting abortions for more patients traveling from states where the procedure is restricted. Now that the Supreme Court has overturned Roe v. Wade, the legal fate of abortion is left up to individual states. WSJ’s Jennifer Calfas explains where abortion access in the U.S. stands now. Photo illustration: Laura Kammermann
Carafem, which operates clinics that perform abortions in Atlanta, Chicago, Nashville, Tenn., and Washington, D.C., said it has shifted a clinician from Tennessee to Illinois to handle higher demand from patients traveling from states where the procedure is restricted.

Carafem said it canceled about half the appointments at its Nashville clinic after the Supreme Court ruling because those patients’ pregnancies had progressed past the six-week mark at which Tennessee law now bans abortion. Carafem provided those patients with information about clinics in neighboring states where they could get an abortion, said Carafem’s chief operating officer Melissa Grant.

“What we’re doing is really watching to see what the need will be because this is just starting,” Ms. Grant said. A fire that occurred at a facility that was to offer surgical and medical abortions in Casper, Wyo., was being investigated as arson. PHOTO: MEAD GRUVER/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Some clinics said they plan to remain in states where abortion could be further restricted. Julie Burkhart worked for two years to open what would be the only clinic providing surgical abortions in Wyoming. Wellspring Health Access was close to opening in the city of Casper near the state’s center in May when someone broke through a window and set fire to a container of gas in the exam and procedure area. Ms. Burkhart said she plans to rebuild the clinic, even if abortion is banned except for rare cases in Wyoming. She said she is also thinking of operating a mobile clinic to conduct abortions. “Any place in America where we can save access to reproductive healthcare, we need to at least try,” she said.

Ms. Burkhart, president of Wellspring Health Access, is also part of a group that recently acquired the Hope Clinic, an abortion provider in southern Illinois. While she rebuilds the Wyoming clinic in the hopes that the trigger law isn’t enacted or is blocked, she has also been working to get the Illinois clinic more resources to handle a surge in demand since the Supreme Court decision.

“There are so many phone calls coming in that we haven’t been able to get to everyone, which is very disheartening,” said Ms. Burkhart. “We had been hiring more people. But now we need more folks.” Dr. Anthony has conducted abortions at her clinic in Jackson, Wyo., for 17 years.





Article: 28
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: 66 Clinics No Longer Provide Abortions After Roe Overturned
Author:  Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date:October 6, 2022 05:01 pm ET
Article_Content:  A study found 26 of those clinics have closed, though some have reopened or plan to reopen in other locations. A new study said 66 clinics in 15 states no longer provide abortions since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. 
More than 60 abortion clinics across the U.S. have stopped providing the procedure since the Supreme Court eliminated federal constitutional protections in June, according to a new study.  

The report, published Thursday by the Guttmacher Institute, found 14 states in which all clinics have ceased abortion services since the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade. More broadly, 66 clinics in 15 states have stopped providing abortions; 40 of those clinics still provide other services, while 26 have closed, according to Guttmacher, a research group that supports abortion rights and tracks national and state statistics.

The report offers a glimpse into the patchwork of abortion access that has emerged since the Supreme Court sent the legality of abortion back to the states. Over the past three months, bans on nearly all abortions have taken effect in about a dozen states, while restrictions on most abortions after six weeks or 15 weeks of pregnancy have been enforced in others. Now that the Supreme Court has overturned Roe v. Wade, the legal fate of abortion is left up to individual states. WSJ’s Jennifer Calfas explains where abortion access in the U.S. stands now. Photo illustration: Laura Kammermann
Abortion rights groups and providers say the implementation of these new laws have caused chaos and confusion for patients and staff, particularly in the days and weeks immediately after the high court’s decision. Legal advocacy groups and abortion providers have challenged the new laws in state courts, arguing they violate aspects of state constitutions. Continuing litigation over the laws in some states has caused local clinics to close, then reopen, then close again.

The Guttmacher Institute report focused on states where bans and narrow restrictions on abortion have taken effect over the past few months. In those 15 states, which include Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Texas and Mississippi, 79 clinics provided abortions before the Supreme Court’s decision in June. By Oct. 2, 13 clinics still provided abortions. All of those are located in Georgia, where a ban on most abortions after six weeks of pregnancy took effect in July.  According to the study, 40 of the clinics that no longer provide abortions still have other services, while 26 clinics have closed. PHOTO: LEAH WILLINGHAM/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Since the enforcement of Texas laws banning nearly all abortions, 12 clinics in the state have completely closed. Eleven others have remained open, offering services other than abortion, according to the study.

In Wisconsin, legal uncertainty over a 1849 ban on abortion has prompted the state’s clinics to stop providing the procedure. The state’s attorney general has vowed not to prosecute clinics under the law, but providers have said they are worried about future actions against them.

Some of the closed clinics have already reopened or announced plans to find a new location in states where abortion remains legal. Clinics closing in states including Mississippi, Texas, North Dakota, Tennessee and Louisiana are aiming to reopen in Illinois, New Mexico or, potentially, Kansas. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the Mississippi clinic at the center of the Supreme Court case, closed in Jackson and opened a new location in Las Cruces, N.M., the clinic’s owner said. Red River Women’s Clinic, previously the only abortion clinic in North Dakota, moved equipment and staff across state lines to Moorhead, Minn., in August. North Dakota wasn’t included in the research group’s study since the state’s trigger law banning most abortions has been temporarily blocked in court.

Researchers at the Guttmacher Institute said the number of clinic closures will likely grow. They expect new restrictions will take effect in more states, including Indiana, South Carolina and Ohio, the timing of which depends on ongoing litigation and state legislative efforts. Jackson Women’s Health Organization closed its Mississippi clinic, pictured here, and opened a new location in Las Cruces, N.M. PHOTO: SANDY HUFFAKER/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY S
“An already precarious abortion access landscape is likely to continue to deteriorate,” Rachel Jones, principal researcher at the Guttmacher Institute, said in a statement. Ms. Jones said more research will need to be done to understand the full impact of the high court’s decision. 

“The picture that is starting to emerge should alarm anyone who supports reproductive freedom and the right to bodily autonomy,” she added.

Representatives at national antiabortion groups said they believe the report is an encouraging sign for a post-Roe America.

“When an abortion facility closes, that hopefully means more babies will live,” said Carol Tobias, president of the National Right to Life Committee. 





Article: 29
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion-Pill Orders Increase, Even in Restrictive States
Author:   Brianna Abbott and Juan Montes 
Publication_Date:July 18, 2022 10:42 am ET
Article_Content: Overseas nonprofits and U.S. telehealth clinics are responding to increased demand in a complicated legal landscape. Some women in states that have banned or restricted medication abortion are finding access to pills through overseas nonprofits. 
A split is emerging between organizations that provide abortion pills to patients in the U.S.

U.S. companies that prescribe abortion pills after telehealth consultations are expanding, but only in states that allow the practice, after the Supreme Court last month removed constitutional protections for abortion. Nonprofits based abroad, meanwhile, are mailing more pills to women across the U.S., including patients in states that have banned or restricted medication abortion.

“The increase in demand has been disproportionate,” said Sandra Cardona, founder of Red Necesito Abortar, a nonprofit in Monterrey, Mexico. She said the group has received more than 400 requests for abortion pills from women in Texas, Oklahoma and Louisiana, among other states, since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade.

U.S.-based telehealth groups Hey Jane, Just The Pill and Choix Inc. said they have received more web traffic, appointment requests and payments from patients in states that allow them to operate since the decision. Some groups encourage patients in states that restrict abortion to travel to states where patients can get the pills legally; some organizations help raise money to pay for their travel. Pills are used to conduct more than half of abortions in the U.S., according to the Guttmacher Institute. Abortion opponents have sought to highlight risks of the drugs. PHOTO: NATALIE BEHRING FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
“We’re more than prepared to accommodate this increase in demand and have been preparing for this reality for months,” said Kiki Freedman, chief executive officer at Hey Jane, which has nearly doubled its clinical team since September. The group, which operates in seven states, said traffic to its website was 10 times higher and payments from new patients had doubled in the week after the Supreme Court decision compared with a month earlier.

The divergent operations of U.S. and foreign-based abortion-pill providers are part of a complex, shifting landscape for access to the procedure across the country. The Biden administration has sought to protect access to pills used to conduct medication abortions that are approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Some lawmakers and antiabortion advocates want to crack down on their use.

Pills are used to conduct more than half of abortions in the U.S., according to the Guttmacher Institute, a policy group that supports abortion rights and tracks related statistics. The procedure usually involves two medicines, mifepristone and misoprostol. The FDA has approved the two-drug regimen for up to 10 weeks of pregnancy. Following the Supreme Court decision that overturned Roe v. Wade, attention has turned to abortion pills. WSJ’s Daniela Hernandez explains how misoprostol and mifepristone work together to terminate a pregnancy, as well as the potential side effects of a medical abortion. Illustration: David Fang
Among some 2,800 people who used telehealth for an abortion, about 96% reported the pills were effective and 1% reported experiencing a serious adverse event, according to a 2022 study in The Lancet Regional Health-Americas. No deaths were reported among the people surveyed.

Abortion opponents have sought to highlight risks of the drugs and said they plan to submit peer-reviewed research to the FDA showing that women who take the pills are more likely to visit emergency rooms afterward than those who get surgical abortions.

Some 20 abortion-rights groups in Mexico send abortion medications to U.S. addresses at no cost, said Maria Antonieta Alcalde, director for Mexico and Central America at Ipas, a nonprofit that advocates for women’s sexual rights. Some women also cross the border to buy abortion pills at Mexican pharmacies. Mexico is attractive to U.S. women because pills are cheaper there and the process doesn’t leave a paper trail, abortion-rights activists said. Abortion rights activists in Texas march to the State Capitol in Austin after the overturning of Roe v. Wade by the U.S. Supreme Court last month. PHOTO: SUZANNE CORDEIRO/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY S
Austria-based Aid Access is also mailing pills to women in states that restrict abortion. The nonprofit said it has U.S.-based clinicians in 22 states where the practice is allowed, and founder and physician Rebecca Gomperts, who is based in Austria, handles requests from people in states that ban or limit medication abortion via telehealth.

Pill requests to Aid Access from people in Texas nearly tripled to about 30 a day over the following three months after the state in September banned most abortions after six weeks of pregnancy, according to research by Abigail Aiken, an associate professor of public affairs at the University of Texas at Austin, published in JAMA Network Open.

“That really gives us a window into what we’ll see now,” Dr. Aiken said. “The group providing the abortion is not complying with Texas law, but they’re not in the country.”

Aid Access has seen a significant increase in requests for pills for immediate and future use, said Christie Pitney, a nurse-midwife and U.S.-based Aid Access clinician.

Pill providers in the U.S. are expanding where abortion is likely to remain protected. Choix said it began operating in New Mexico this month in addition to California, Colorado and Illinois, and it expects patients to travel there from surrounding states expected to ban abortion. Choix said it plans to operate in every state where abortion is legal by the end of 2023.

Just The Pill, which provides abortion pills in four states, said it is receiving about 25 appointment requests a day compared with 16 a day before the decision. Just The Pill also has deployed a mobile clinic to provide reproductive-health services including abortions in Colorado and is fundraising for a second in Illinois. The clinics will operate along state borders to make them accessible to patients from nearby states, said medical director Julie Amaon. Helping women travel for abortions from states where the procedure is restricted to states where it is allowed could carry legal risks, some health-policy experts said. States including Connecticut have enacted legislation protecting patients who travel from other states and their providers. But some have laws that could allow prosecution or lawsuits targeting people or groups that help residents get abortions.

“In states that ban abortion and have tried to tamp down on medication abortion, it could be hard to enforce that, but I think it’s going to be risky,” said Katie Keith, director of the Health Policy and the Law Initiative at Georgetown University’s O’Neill Institute.




Article: 30
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Wisconsin Abortion Clinics Prepare to Resume Appointments
Author:  Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date:September 17, 2023 08:30 am ET
Article_Content: Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin is set to offer abortion services again in Milwaukee and Madison, while litigation continues over a previously dormant 1849 state law banning most abortions. Abortion in Wisconsin has been in legal limbo for more than a year. Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin halted abortion services after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June 2022, citing confusion over whether a more than 170-year-old state law banning most abortions could be enforced. The possibility that providers could be prosecuted was too high, Planned Parenthood said, so the group stopped providing abortions in the Midwestern state.

That will change Monday, when Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin resumes abortion services at two clinics in Milwaukee and Madison. The organization is leaning on a July ruling from a Dane County Circuit Court judge who said the 1849 act doesn’t apply to consensual abortions. The clinics operate in counties where district attorneys have said they wouldn’t enforce the law.

The potential risk of prosecution has declined, said Michelle Velasquez, director of legal advocacy and services at Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin. “In our view, we have absolute legal ability to provide abortion services,” Velasquez said. 

“This is a really important first step, but it is just that—a first step,” she added. “We have a long road ahead of us.” WSJ’s Laura Kusisto highlights where abortion access stands now and what could come next. Photo illustration: Preston Jessee
The uncertainty in Wisconsin reflects the complex and still-shifting abortion landscape since the Supreme Court’s June 2022 decision sent the issue back to the states. More than a dozen states currently enforce bans on nearly all abortions. Other states have passed laws or amended their constitutions to protect the right to an abortion.

Wisconsin Gov. Tony Evers, a Democrat, has attempted several times to convene the state’s Republican-led Legislature to repeal the 1849 law. The Legislature has declined to consider a repeal. Evers said Thursday that even with abortions resuming in the state, Wisconsinites must continue to further protect those rights.

State Attorney General Josh Kaul, a Democrat, last year sued district attorneys in three counties where Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin clinics operate to block enforcement of the previously dormant law. A newly liberal-leaning Wisconsin Supreme Court has shifted expectations of how the lawsuit might play out. 

Wisconsin Attorney General Josh Kaul has sued district attorneys in three counties to block enforcement of a 1849 state law banning most abortions. PHOTO: JOHN HART/WISCONSIN STATE JOURNAL/AP
Wisconsin House Speaker Robin Vos, a Republican, on Thursday said Planned Parenthood’s decision to resume abortions was presumptive given ongoing litigation. He said he expects that outside private groups might challenge the decision.

“If Planned Parenthood is so convinced that they are going to win at the state Supreme Court that they are willing to break the law, which the law on the books still is the 1849 statute, it’s just another reminder that some people flub the law whether it’s the law on the books or not,” Vos said.

Planned Parenthood’s clinics in Madison and Milwaukee are now scheduling appointments and anticipating an unknown level of demand. For the past year residents capable of traveling outside the state for an abortion have gone to clinics in neighboring Illinois and Minnesota.

The Wisconsin clinics will operate within the same state legal framework they followed before the Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization ruling eliminated the constitutional right to an abortion. Patients scheduled to visit the clinics Monday will be completing the counseling appointment required 24 hours before an abortion, said Dr. Allison Linton, an obstetrician-gynecologist and associate medical director for Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin.

“There’s only a certain degree you can prepare for,” Linton said as staff readied for the coming week. “You just have to sort of adapt once we restart.” 

Members of Wisconsin Right to Life, an antiabortion group, were surprised by Planned Parenthood’s decision and are examining next steps, including in the Legislature or through the courts, said Gracie Skogman, the group’s legislative and PAC director. Skogman said the organization believes the legality of abortion in Wisconsin is still unclear. Over the past year, the group has expanded the hours and services offered at crisis pregnancy resource centers in the state, Skogman said. Those centers don’t offer abortions and provide “life-affirming care,” she said.

“Our hope would be that even in a situation where now abortion is on the table again, there are so many women who have been able to get connected to the other resources that are available,” Skogman said. A Planned Parenthood facility in Chicago has been a destination for Wisconsin residents seeking abortions. PHOTO: TAYLOR GLASCOCK FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
The Planned Parenthood locations have remained open for other services, including family planning, cancer diagnostic services and vasectomies. Wisconsin staff members have traveled once or twice a week to Planned Parenthood’s clinic across the border in Waukegan, Ill., to help manage an influx of patients from their home state and around the country, according to Planned Parenthood of Illinois. Some patients who visited Planned Parenthood’s Wisconsin locations to discuss their options ended up traveling for abortions at the Waukegan clinic, where they would be greeted by the same staff, Linton said. 

Illinois, where abortion is protected under state law, has become a destination for women seeking abortions nationwide since Dobbs. Planned Parenthood of Illinois has provided abortions to patients from 36 states. It said it has seen a sevenfold increase in Wisconsinites coming for abortions, making them the largest group of out-of-state patients. The return of abortion services in Wisconsin will allow clinics in Illinois to see more patients from other states, said Cristina Villarreal, chief of external affairs for Planned Parenthood of Illinois.

It will also cut in half the average distance a Wisconsinite might need to travel for an abortion, according to research by Caitlin Myers, a Middlebury College economics professor who studies the effects of abortion policies. About 800,000 women of reproductive age in Wisconsin will have to travel an average of 50 miles for an abortion when the Milwaukee and Madison clinics reopen—compared with 100 miles before.

“It’s going to substantially reduce the burden for Wisconsin residents seeking an abortion,” Myers said. It couldn’t be determined if or when Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin might resume appointments at its clinic in Sheboygan, where the district attorney has said he would enforce the 1849 law. 

Linton said the organization is working toward resuming appointments there, but doesn’t have a clear timeline as it sorts staffing and logistical issues. 

“For better or for worse, I think we now have practice sort of adapting to whatever changes may come,” Linton said. The return of abortion services in Milwaukee is expected to help cut the time patients in the state need to travel. PHOTO: TANNEN MAURY/EPA/SHUTTERSTOCK
Abortion-rights supporters and opponents both expect the state’s Supreme Court to have the final say on the 1849 law. Liberals gained control of the court for the first time in decades this year.

Resuming services at two clinics in liberal counties is an incremental approach to restoring access in the state until there is a clearer decision from the state Supreme Court, said Rachel Rebouché, the dean of Temple University Beasley School of Law, who studies reproductive-health law. 

“That’s a pretty firm foundation,” Rebouché said of Planned Parenthood’s legal standing. “But it’s not bulletproof and it won’t be until the [state] Supreme Court decides how this applies or in what situations, or until the Legislature acts.”  






Article: 31
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: North Carolina Passes 12-Week Abortion Ban
Author:  Jennifer Calfas and Laura Kusisto
Publication_Date: May 4, 2023 06:27 pm ET
Article_Content: The GOP-led legislature might override an expected veto in a state that has been a crucial access point since Roe was overturned. An exam room at A Woman’s Choice clinic in Charlotte, N.C. 
North Carolina’s Republican-led legislature passed a ban on most abortions after 12 weeks of pregnancy, setting the state on a path to restricting access that could ultimately reverberate across the region.

North Carolina has become a crucial access point for patients in the Southeast seeking abortions after the Supreme Court last year overturned Roe v. Wade and many states in the region enacted near-total bans on the procedure.

Lawmakers passed the 12-week ban Thursday by a vote of 29-20 in the Senate and on Wednesday along party lines in the House. The bill’s passage came quickly after Republicans announced Tuesday they had reached a consensus following months of negotiations within the party. Republicans crafted the legislation behind closed doors, bypassing the usual committee and amendment process. 

North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper, a Democrat, said Wednesday he would veto the bill. A new Republican supermajority in the legislature might have the votes to override his veto. 

From a high-stakes legal battle over the abortion pill mifepristone, to states debating their own legislation, WSJ’s Laura Kusisto highlights where abortion access stands now and what could come next. Photo Illustration: Preston Jessee
The bill’s passage in a closely politically divided state like North Carolina shows some Republicans are willing to pursue new limits on abortion, despite some of the blowback the party has faced on the issue over the past year. Florida lawmakers in April passed a ban on abortion after six weeks of pregnancy. In other states, such as South Carolina and Nebraska, Republican legislators failed to pass their own abortion bans last week amid tensions over how far to go.

North Carolina Rep. Tricia Cotham switched parties last month after she was elected as a Democrat in November, giving the GOP their supermajority. She voted to pass the 12-week abortion ban on Wednesday. A year ago, after the leak of a draft Supreme Court opinion on Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, Ms. Cotham said she would fight to protect abortion access in North Carolina. 

Current North Carolina law bans most abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy. 

The new legislation bans nearly all abortions after 12 weeks of pregnancy, a threshold Republicans called a compromise. It allows limited exceptions for rape, incest and serious fetal anomalies. There is no gestational limit on abortion in medical emergencies. 

Eighty-eight percent of abortions in North Carolina in 2020 occurred before or at 12 weeks of pregnancy, according to data from the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services. The bans implemented since then across the Southeast and elsewhere in the U.S. have pushed abortions later into pregnancy because of increased demand and delays at clinics in states where abortion remains legal.

The new legislation also adds requirements for in-person medical visits that could make abortions more difficult to obtain for women traveling from out of state or taking off work, abortion-rights groups say.

Rep. Tricia Cotham switched parties to become a Republican, and voted to pass the 12-week abortion ban. PHOTO: JONATHAN DRAKE/REUTERS
Republican lawmakers supporting the legislation said they landed on a reasonable approach to restricting abortion during their closed-door conversations. 

“North Carolina has an opportunity to be a leader in this country for finding a way out of the acrimony and extremism that has tended to dominate our discussion of this issue,” GOP Sen. Amy Galey said on the floor Thursday. 

Democrats denounced the legislation and the strategies Republicans used to bring it forward with little opportunity for public comment and consideration. “This law will make many North Carolinians become healthcare refugees who must go to other states to get the care that they need—that is if they can afford to do so,” Sen. Natasha Marcus said.
Protesters supporting abortion rights gathered outside of the legislature and in the chambers Wednesday and Thursday. They chanted, “Shame!” at lawmakers after they voted to pass the legislation in the House and the Senate.

Marc Hetherington, a political-science professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, said that given the state’s political mix, the new abortion restrictions could have future consequences for Republicans running for governor and other statewide offices. 

People march to the North Carolina State Legislative Building after attending a rally protesting proposed new abortion regulations. PHOTO: BOB KARP/ZUMA PRESS
“It’s a compromise within the Republican caucus. It’s not a compromise really at all as it relates to the state as a whole,” Mr. Hetherington said. “This is still going to put North Carolina on the relatively conservative end of the spectrum on abortion restrictions.”

Antiabortion groups say the bill strikes the right balance given the current political environment in the state. Caitlin Connors, southern regional director for SBA Pro-Life America, said North Carolinians are “rightly concerned with their state becoming an abortion destination.” 

More than a dozen states banned or heavily restricted access to abortion after the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision eliminated federal protections. The patchwork of abortion access has prompted pregnant women and girls to travel across state lines for the procedure—including to North Carolina. 

The state saw one of the largest increases in abortion since the Supreme Court’s decision last June. On average, there were 788 more abortions each month there compared with before the ruling, according to WeCount, an abortion-data project sponsored by the Society of Family Planning, which supports abortion rights.











Article: 32
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion Providers in Illinois, Colorado and Florida Prepare for Patient Influx if Roe Is Overturned
Author:  Julie Wernau, Dan Frosch and Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date: June 24, 2022 10:17 am ET
Article_Content: Antiabortion advocates will also focus efforts in states close to ones that may outlaw or limit abortions following an expected Supreme Court ruling. FAIRVIEW HEIGHTS, Ill.—The future of abortion access is beginning to take shape in places like this southern Illinois town, which is expected to become a destination for women from nearby states poised to outlaw abortion if Roe v. Wade is overturned. Bracing for an influx of patients, Kawanna Shannon, director of patient access at Planned Parenthood’s regional logistics center in southern Illinois, said she and colleagues are trying to hire 15 more employees and stay open seven days a week, compared with six currently. The lab at the Planned Parenthood Loop Health Center in Chicago. A map of Illinois hangs in CEO of Planned Parenthood of Illinois Jennifer Welch's office. Rivers make up most of Illinois's borders, so Planned Parenthood locations are planned based on where people can enter the state by bridge.
A draft decision leaked last month indicated that the U.S. Supreme Court may end the constitutional right to abortion in a decision expected to come in the next few weeks.

If that happens, 13 states are poised to implement so-called trigger laws to quickly or immediately outlaw abortion in most cases. They include Missouri and Kentucky, which each have one abortion clinic and currently have more restrictive abortion laws than neighboring Illinois.

“We are already an oasis in a vast abortion desert,” said Jennifer Welch, president and chief executive officer of Planned Parenthood of Illinois, referring to neighboring states that already have robust restrictions on abortion. “The anticipated decision…doesn’t change that, it just increases the size of the desert.”

Other states that could become more popular destinations for abortions in a post-Roe world include Colorado and Florida, which both border states with more restrictive regimes. If Roe v. Wade is overturned, as many as 26 states are expected to ban or restrict access to abortion, creating ‘abortion islands’ in states where access is protected. Here’s how healthcare providers in Illinois are preparing for the expected influx in out-of-state patients. Photo Illustration: Laura Kammermann
Antiabortion activists said they are focusing more of their resources in those places as well, recruiting volunteers, increasing fundraising and building out vans they can park outside clinics with services intended to convince women to remain pregnant.

Planned Parenthood of Illinois said it expects an additional 20,000 to 30,000 patients a year to enter the state seeking abortions if Roe, the 1973 decision establishing a right to abortion, is overturned. Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains, which operates clinics in Colorado as well as New Mexico and Nevada, projects it will receive an additional 10,000 patients seeking abortions annually, up 80% from the current volume.

Colorado is seeing an uptick in abortions already, according to the Cobalt Abortion Fund, a Denver-based group that provides financial assistance for people seeking abortions. The organization said 32% of its appointments from January to May of this year were for out-of-state patients. That is up from 17% last year. ‘We are already an oasis in a vast abortion desert,’ says Jennifer Welch, president and CEO of Planned Parenthood of Illinois.
Three quarters of the patients the group assisted with appointments this year came from Texas, which passed a law last year banning abortions after the sixth week of pregnancy. In 2021, 26% of the out-of-state patients Cobalt helped with appointments came from Texas.

“We’re very good at getting people from out of state. What’s new is the number of people, and that they need access to care much earlier in their pregnancy,” said Karen Middleton, Cobalt’s president.

Others come from nearby states including Wyoming, where what would have been the state’s only facility to offer surgical and medical abortions was set on fire May 25, weeks before it was set to open, according to Julie Burkhart, the clinic’s president. Casper police and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives have said they are investigating the blaze as arson. Meanwhile, the FBI said Thursday it is investigating a series of attacks and threats around the country against centers that try to convince women not to terminate pregnancies and offices of antiabortion groups.

Antiabortion groups are mobilizing alongside the abortion providers. Colorado-based Save the Storks is currently adding 30 buses to a fleet of 75 nationwide that provide medical services to pregnant women and are placed near abortion clinics and college campuses, said Chief Executive Diane Ferraro. That is the most it has ever had in production in a single year.

Amy Gehrke, executive director of Illinois Right to Life, said her organization has been visiting community centers and churches around the state to recruit volunteers and expand its lobbying power. Authorities are investigating a fire at a facility set to offer surgical and medical abortions in Casper, Wyo., as arson. PHOTO: MEAD GRUVER/ASSOCIATED PRESS
“The pro-life people of Illinois are becoming very keenly aware that we are going to be going to be ground zero for abortion,” said Ms. Gehrke.

Coalition Life, an antiabortion group that operates just across the Illinois border in St. Louis, is expanding an internship program that pays people to visit abortion clinics to try to counsel women before they go inside.
Abortion providers in Florida say they are preparing for a potential influx of patients from Southern states with more restrictive laws. Planned Parenthood’s Tallahassee clinic is preparing to expand the days it provides abortions to five days from three. The organization’s Jacksonville clinic added a second clinician to accommodate an increase in patients from out of state after a six-week ban in Texas took effect last year.

A ban on most abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy, which has been challenged in court, is slated to take effect July 1 in Florida. But providers said they worry the state’s Republican leaders may try to institute tighter limits or outlaw abortions entirely if Roe is overturned, ending Florida’s status as a destination in the region for women seeking to terminate pregnancies.

A spokeswoman for Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis said the Republican “has always been pro-life,” but declined to comment on potential legislation, as did incoming Republican leaders of the state Senate and House, which are expected to reconvene in 2023. Mifepristone and Misoprostol tablets used to medically induce abortion are seen at the Planned Parenthood Loop Health Center.






Article: 33
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: More Women Requesting Abortion Pills Outside Formal Channels, Study Finds
Author:  Laura Kusisto
Publication_Date: November 1, 2022 11:34 am ET
Article_Content: Researchers say requests for mail-order medication have surged in the months since the Supreme Court eliminated constitutional protections for abortion
Women wishing to end their pregnancies using pills generally take a two-medication regime that includes misoprostol.
The Supreme Court’s decision overturning Roe v. Wade in June appears to be driving an increase in demand for abortion-inducing drugs administered outside of the formal medical system, according to a study released Tuesday. 

The new study, led by a professor at the University of Texas at Austin, found a 158% increase in requests for abortion pills to the organization Aid Access, a nonprofit based in Austria that provides mail-order abortion pills in the U.S. and worldwide after a telemedicine consultation with a physician. 

The study examined daily requests to Aid Access following the release of the Supreme Court decision compared with a period from September 2021 to May 2022, before the unauthorized leak of an early draft of the Supreme Court ruling signaled the court was preparing to end federal constitutional protections for abortion. 

More than a dozen states have banned or heavily restricted abortion since the Supreme Court decision. Patient access to abortion medication via direct mail sits in a legal gray area in some states. The new study suggests that the narrowing of legal abortion access has pushed the procedure under the table in some parts of the country, but not necessarily in the same way as in the days before the 1973 Roe decision, when some women used coat hangers or sought out dubious providers in back alleys. Now, more women appear to be turning to the internet and taking pills at home. 

“Though we are back in a very restrictive environment in some states, what it means to self manage an abortion has fundamentally changed,” said Abigail Aiken, an associate professor of public affairs at the University of Texas at Austin and the lead researcher on the study. 

Because self-managed abortions occur outside of formal medical channels, researchers are still struggling to find an accurate way to track them as they are expected to occupy a larger share of abortions in the future. The study data include more than 42,000 requests for pills in 30 states. Aid Access is the only provider of medication abortion outside the formal medical setting via telehealth, and thus a rare source of data on what is otherwise a largely informal underground market. 

Overall, there were more than 900,000 abortions performed in the U.S. in 2020, not including self-managed abortions, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a policy group that supports abortion rights and tracks national and state statistics.

Mail-order abortions pose challenges for lawmakers in states looking to ban or heavily restrict abortion. Some states have sought to restrict the practice, but providers like Aid Access generally use unmarked packages, making it difficult for officials in states to enforce these laws.

Lawmakers also have said they don’t wish to prosecute women themselves for taking the pills, giving them limited recourse against any in-state actors.

The states that saw the largest increase in request for pills from Aid Access were Louisiana, Mississippi, Arkansas, Alabama and Oklahoma, all places with some of the strictest abortion laws in the country. 

Kristan Hawkins, president of Students for Life of America, said her antiabortion group is urging lawmakers to do more to crack down on medication abortion, particularly the selling of pills across international borders. “This is the new back alley,” Ms. Hawkins said. “They’re putting women’s lives at risk.” 

Erin Matson, executive director of Reproaction, an abortion rights advocacy group, said groups like hers are helping to spread information about how to take the pills safely and when to seek medical care. The bigger challenge, Ms. Matson said, is ensuring no one faces criminal charges in a shifting legal landscape. “The primary risk in this post-Roe America is legal and not medical,” she said. 

Women wishing to end their pregnancies using pills generally take a two-medication regime of mifepristone and misoprostol. It is considered safe during the first 10 weeks of pregnancy. Beforehand, physicians may perform a blood test or ultrasound to confirm the pregnancy and how far along it is and, following the abortion, to confirm that it was fully terminated. 

Dr. Aiken co-wrote a separate study of complications among those who self-managed their abortions through Aid Access. Of those who used the service in the year ending March 2019, just over 96% reported successfully ending their pregnancy without further intervention and 1% reported serious complications, including needing a blood transfusion or receiving intravenous antibiotics.






Article: 34
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Oklahoma Enacts Toughest Abortion Ban in Nation
Author:  Laura Kusisto and Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date: May 25, 2022 09:52 pm ET
Article_Content: Republican Gov. Kevin Stitt signed the toughest abortion ban in effect in the U.S., outlawing the procedure at any stage of pregnancy and and delegating enforcement to private citizens. Oklahoma Gov. Kevin Stitt  Oklahoma’s governor on Wednesday signed into the law the toughest abortion ban in effect in the U.S., outlawing the procedure at any stage of pregnancy and delegating enforcement to private citizens.

The law, signed by Republican Gov. Kevin Stitt, takes effect immediately.

With the governor’s signature, Oklahoma becomes the only state to currently ban abortion throughout pregnancy, going a step beyond Texas’s six-week abortion ban that took effect in September 2021 and a similar six-week law recently enacted in Oklahoma.

These laws were designed to sidestep constitutional protection for abortion rights. Instead of vesting enforcement of the bans with state officials, the laws allow private citizens to bring civil lawsuits for monetary damages against anyone who performs or aids an abortion, a strategy that has made it more difficult for abortion-rights groups to challenge the bans in court.

The Oklahoma law sets minimum damages at $10,000, plus legal costs. It provides an exception for a medical emergency or if the pregnancy is the result of rape, sexual assault or incest that has been reported to law enforcement.

The Supreme Court is expected to issue a ruling by the end of June that could weaken or overturn Roe v. Wade, the 1973 decision that established a constitutional right to an abortion. A draft high court opinion leaked this month suggested the court was preparing to overturn Roe. But for now, constitutional protection for a woman’s right to access abortion remain in place.

Abortion-rights groups said they would ask the Supreme Court of Oklahoma to block the new state law from going into effect. Thus far the court hasn’t granted a similar request to block the state’s six-week ban.

“Today, for the first time in nearly 50 years, abortion is illegal—at every stage of pregnancy—in an American state,” said Emily Wales, interim president and chief executive of Planned Parenthood Great Plains.

The governor’s office didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment.

The Texas Heartbeat Act, known as SB 8, was the first bill of this kind and prompted a steep decline in abortions performed in the state. Abortion-rights groups say many women traveled across state lines to get abortions, and others induced abortions with medication. Oklahoma in recent months became a nearby destination of Texans traveling to obtain an abortion, according to abortion clinics there.

Planned Parenthood clinics in Oklahoma City and Tulsa stopped scheduling abortion appointments before the governor signed the legislation to avoid last-minute cancellations, said a spokesperson for Planned Parenthood Great Plains.

Oklahoma lawmakers have passed a number of antiabortion restrictions this legislative session. A separate near-total criminal ban on abortion is slated to take effect in August.

Oklahoma is also one of 13 states with so-called trigger laws slated to ban most abortions if the Supreme Court overturns Roe v. Wade.

A leaked draft of an opinion overturning Roe v. Wade could change before it’s finalized. WSJ explains how the Supreme Court makes decisions and what could follow if the right to an abortion is rescinded. Illustration: Jacob Reynolds







Article: 35
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Oklahoma and Texas Laws, Roe v. Wade Leak Put Focus on Abortion Access
Author:  Jennifer Calfas, Taylor Umlauf and Josh Ulick
Publication_Date: May 26, 2022 01:43 pm ET
Article_Content: The numbers behind abortion trends in the U.S., including weeks of gestation, and the mother’s age and reasons for terminating a pregnancy, highlight the role of abortion access. Abortion-rights demonstrators and antiabortion counterprotesters this month in Washington, D.C.
A leaked draft opinion suggests the Supreme Court may be preparing to overturn Roe v. Wade, the 1973 decision that established the constitutional right to an abortion. If that federal right is rescinded, state laws—or possibly federal law—would determine the legality of abortion, potentially shortening the time frame in many states for women to have the procedure performed.

Lawmakers have been preparing for such a shift for years. Some states aim to continue to preserve abortion rights, but many states have passed laws seeking to limit the procedure that are currently blocked by state and federal courts and could go into effect if Roe were overturned.

Current Supreme Court precedent protects the right to an abortion until fetal viability, which occurs around 22 to 24 weeks into a pregnancy. Some state legislation over the years has sought to restrict abortions performed before fetal viability but has, for the most part, been deemed unconstitutional. Oklahoma and Texas have implemented bans in the past year on performing abortions after six weeks.

Most abortions are performed early in pregnancy, well ahead of the 24-week mark. About 93% are done in the first 13 weeks, 80% before 10 weeks, and 43% in the first six weeks, according to a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention study of 2019 data. Oklahoma Gov. Kevin Stitt on Wednesday signed a near-total ban on abortion at any stage of pregnancy, part of a flurry of abortion restrictions the GOP-led legislature has passed in recent weeks.

Another law enacted in the state earlier this month bans the procedure after an embryo’s cardiac activity can be detected, usually around six weeks into a pregnancy. Modeled after a Texas ban that went into effect last year, these two laws differ from other restrictions attempted over the years because of a new enforcement structure that empowers private citizens to bring civil lawsuits against abortion clinics and others who may assist someone in obtaining an abortion.

After Texas’ six-week ban went into effect last September, the number of abortions per month in the state dropped by more than half, according to the state’s Health & Human Services Commission. Abortion-rights groups and clinics say many women, when possible, traveled to nearby states such as Louisiana and Oklahoma for the procedure. Many people in Texas were able to get abortion pills through telemedicine as well. Minneapolis-based telemedicine provider Just the Pill served 900 patients in the first four months of this year following the passage of the Texas law, compared with 1,300 in all of 2021, said Julie Amaon, Just the Pill’s medical director. The Food and Drug Administration in December eased restrictions on medications used to terminate a pregnancy. A number of states have regulations and partial bans on the use of these pills.

Ten states have passed laws, currently blocked by courts and not in effect, that would shorten the time frame for obtaining abortions to six weeks, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a policy group that supports abortion rights and tracks abortion statistics. Five states have laws—also currently blocked by courts—that would impose near-total bans. These laws could take effect if Roe v. Wade were overturned.

Thirteen states have so-called trigger laws on the books, which vary in their penalties but would ban most abortions in those states if the Supreme Court overturns Roe. The laws would go into effect either automatically or after action from state leaders. The majority of states’ restrictions allow some exceptions. While those vary, they can include pregnancies caused by rape or incest, pregnancies that endanger the life or health of a patient, and fetal abnormality.

Teenagers were most likely to get abortions at 18 weeks or after, according to the CDC survey. Those 15 years old and under were most likely to get them at 21 weeks or later, the survey found.

Having to travel more than three hours to a clinic was one of the most significant factors leading to a delay in getting an abortion among those seeking the procedure after 20 weeks or more of pregnancy, according to a 2013 study in the journal Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health.

Economic challenges, including the cost of the procedure, were high on the list of reasons women cited for delaying abortions, according to the study. Women who obtained later abortions more frequently cited those financial hurdles than did women who received first-trimester procedures, according to the study. It also found that women who had never been married or were separated or divorced were less likely to get later abortions than those who were married. Black and Hispanic women were slightly more likely to undergo later abortions than white women, according to the study.

A number of states have additional abortion bans on the books that predate Roe v. Wade. Such bans have been unenforceable for the past five decades, but states could look to enact them if Roe were overturned.





Article: 36
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Uncertainty Over Abortion Access Grows After Supreme Court Ruling
Author:  Laura Kusisto ,Jennifer Calfas and Deanna Paul
Publication_Date: Updated June 27, 2022 9:30 pm ET
Article_Content:  Louisiana abortion ban is halted for now by a state judge, while other mostly Republican-led states move forward with prohibitions
Antiabortion activists praying outside the Supreme Court in Washington, D.C., during a celebration on Monday of the court’s ruling overturning Roe v. Wade. PHOTO: MICHAEL REYNOLDS/EPA/SHUTTERSTOCK
Regions across the U.S. faced an uncertain abortion landscape on Monday, as some states moved to enforce new restrictions, others remained in limbo, and fresh legal battles began to take shape after the Supreme Court withdrew constitutional protections for abortion.

Abortion access has continued to evolve almost by the hour since the court on Friday overruled Roe v. Wade, the 1973 decision that for almost half a century protected a woman’s right to choose an abortion. Abortions are now largely unavailable in about a dozen states, either because of new bans or legal uncertainty, while another half dozen or more states could ban or restrict abortion in the coming days and weeks.

After the high court’s ruling, abortion-rights litigants have been turning quickly to state courts, filing at least six lawsuits that could help determine whether and how quickly conservative-leaning states can move to curtail access to the procedure. On Friday, the Supreme Court did more than overrule Roe v. Wade and allow states to ban abortion. The Court showed how they view rights that are not explicitly mentioned in the Constitution. WSJ’s Jess Bravin explains. 
Several early post-Roe legal developments came Monday, with state judges in Louisiana and Utah issuing restraining orders that temporarily blocked abortion bans in those states, while a federal judge cleared the way for South Carolina to enforce a ban on abortion after six weeks of pregnancy.

Judge Robin Giarrusso in New Orleans issued the Louisiana order in response to a lawsuit filed by Hope Medical Group for Women, a reproductive healthcare provider in Shreveport, and Medical Students for Choice. The groups said the state has three different laws triggering bans on abortion, causing significant confusion over which one is in effect, what the penalties are and what exceptions are available.

“We’re in uncharted territory with respect to these laws,” said Joanna Wright of Boies Schiller Flexner LLP, an attorney for the plaintiffs.

Louisiana has an explicit provision in its state constitution specifying it doesn’t protect abortion. A hearing in the case is set for early July. In light of the judge’s order, Hope Medical Group for Women will resume appointments Tuesday morning, said Kathaleen Pittman, the clinic’s administrator. Supreme Court Abortion Decision Draws Reactions Nationwide
Ruling overturning Roe v. Wade sparks widespread gatherings of abortion-rights and antiabortion campaigners
A spokeswoman for Gov. John Bel Edwards, a Democrat who opposes abortion, said, “This challenge to Louisiana’s trigger law was completely expected. For quite some time, our law has clearly stated that abortion would be outlawed in Louisiana if Roe v. Wade was overturned.”

A Utah judge later on Monday blocked that state’s 2020 law triggering a ban on all abortions except in the case of rape, incest or a medical emergency. Karrie Galloway, president and chief executive of Planned Parenthood Association of Utah, which challenged the ban, said the order would allow abortion to resume in the state.

Judge Andrew Stone said Planned Parenthood’s lawsuit “raised serious constitutional issues” under state law “which are fair grounds for litigation.” Abortion providers and patients would be irreparably harmed by the new law, clinic personnel would risk felony prosecution and “women in Utah will lack safe local abortion services,” he said. A spokesman for Utah Attorney General Sean Reyes declined to comment.

Since the Supreme Court ruling, bans on many or most abortions have taken effect in states including Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Missouri, Ohio and South Dakota. Other states, including Oklahoma and Texas, had moved to ban most abortions even before the decision. South Carolina’s six-week ban that a judge allowed to go into effect Monday was passed last year. The law includes exceptions in cases of life-threatening medical emergencies, as well as exceptions for rape or incest before 20 weeks of pregnancy.

“Our state is now carrying out a government’s most sacred and fundamental duty, protecting life,” said South Carolina Attorney General Alan Wilson.

Jenny Black, president and CEO of Planned Parenthood South Atlantic, said its local clinics would remain open and provide abortions in compliance with the law. “This fight is far from over,” she said.

Abortion providers and rights groups filed lawsuits in Kentucky, Mississippi and Idaho on Monday seeking to block abortion bans from taking effect, arguing that access to the procedure is protected by their respective state constitutions.

Texas abortion providers also filed a lawsuit Monday, citing confusion over the state law on abortion. The state has three different sets of abortion prohibitions in play and the providers say that uncertainty about what laws are in effect has forced them to stop providing abortions.

Elsewhere, confusion over abortion restrictions has prompted clinics in states such as Arizona and Wisconsin to stop appointments. Providers in Wisconsin canceled dozens of appointments Friday and Saturday, expecting the state’s 1849 law banning most abortions could now be enforced.

“We really had to think about what the risks were or are for continuing to provide,” said Michelle Velasquez, director of legal advocacy and services at Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin.

Wisconsin Gov. Tony Evers, a Democrat, on Monday said he would offer clemency to doctors if they were prosecuted under the state’s 1849 abortion law, but also said it could be legally dangerous for Planned Parenthood to resume abortions in the state. Mr. Evers said he would speak to local district attorneys and to Wisconsin’s attorney general about the path forward. “The details are still in progress,” he said of the clemency proposal.

Some Republican state lawmakers, meanwhile, have indicated they believed the 173-year-old law is now in effect.

“Unless there is evidence indicating that those who came before us made an error, I will support Wisconsin’s current law that protects the right to Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness for every unborn child,” GOP state Sen. Chris Kapenga said on Friday.

In Mississippi, state Attorney General Lynn Fitch, a Republican, took steps Monday that allowed the state’s trigger law to take effect in 10 days. Passed in 2007, that law bans most abortions except in cases of life-threatening medical emergencies or rape that has been reported to law enforcement.

Mississippi was at the center of the Supreme Court’s ruling last week in Dobbs vs. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, a case that focused on a ban on abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy. When that litigation began, the state was seeking more latitude to restrict abortion before fetal viability. By the time it argued the case at the high court, the state made broader arguments and pushed for the elimination of abortion rights.

Antiabortion groups celebrated the move to enforce bans in Mississippi and other states, saying they are preparing to step up and provide services to women in those places. “Lives are being saved immediately by ensuring that the people have a voice,” said SBA Pro-Life America President Marjorie Dannenfelser. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the state’s only abortion clinic, vowed to continue providing abortions for as long as possible.

The facility is expecting July 7 to be its last day of procedures, but will remain open, answering any calls or doing referrals and other services that are legally possible, said Diane Derzis, the clinic’s owner. Meanwhile, the organization is preparing to open a new location in Las Cruces, N.M., in two weeks, Ms. Derzis said.

“This is the way it’s going to be from now on,” Ms. Derzis said. “None of us really know the answers yet. We’re all feeling our way through this.”

California’s legislature passed a measure Monday that will allow voters in November to approve or reject a constitutional amendment guaranteeing abortion rights in the state. The bill passed the Democratic-controlled state senate and assembly with more than the two-third majority needed and was supported by Democratic Gov. Gavin Newsom. If approved by a majority of voters in the overwhelmingly Democratic state, it would add language to the California constitution guaranteeing individuals a “fundamental right to choose to have an abortion and their fundamental right to choose or refuse contraceptives.”

In Washington, D.C., Democratic lawmakers previewed possible plans. In a letter to Democratic colleagues, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) said she was looking at pursuing legislation that would protect women’s personal data stored in reproductive health apps and make clear that Americans have the right to travel freely across state lines. She also said the House could again bring up a bill that aims to solidify women’s access to abortion. That bill passed the House but failed to advance in the Senate.







Article: 37
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Veterans Affairs to Provide Abortion Services for Health Dangers, Rape and Incest
Author:  Ben Kesling
Publication_Date: Updated Sept. 2, 2022 3:39 pm ET
Article_Content: The VA for the first time in its history will provide abortions at federal facilities, even in states that have outlawed the procedure The Department of Veteran Affairs rolled out a new policy on abortion that it said could be immediately implemented. 
The Department of Veterans Affairs, for the first time in its history, will provide abortion services and counseling to veterans in cases of health dangers, rape and incest, including at federal facilities in states that have outlawed the procedure.

The department, whose healthcare reach spans the country and U.S. territories, announced the policy in an interim final rule Friday that it said allows for immediate implementation of the new policy.

“Pregnant veterans and VA beneficiaries deserve to have access to world-class reproductive care when they need it most,” VA secretary Denis McDonough said. “That’s what our nation owes them, and that’s what we at VA will deliver.”


The policy is the latest signal that the Biden administration is aiming to challenge states that have banned or heavily restricted abortion since the Supreme Court’s decision in June that overruled Roe v. Wade and ended the constitutional right to the procedure.

The VA said that if clinicians face legal action in states where abortion has been outlawed, the Justice Department will step in. “If it ever becomes necessary, VA will work with DOJ to ensure the full strength of the federal government is available to defend eligible VA employees,” a VA spokesman said.

The move drew criticism from the GOP.

“This proposal is contrary to longstanding, settled law and a complete administrative overreach,” said Rep. Mike Bost (R., Ill.), the top Republican on the House Committee on Veterans’ Affairs. “I oppose it and am already working to put a stop to it.”

Rep. Mark Takano (D., Calif.), the chairman of the House committee, said the new policy puts the VA “on par with all other federal healthcare programs.”

When the VA last considered the issue in-depth in the late 1990s, it declined to provide abortion services at its facilities, knowing that veterans and beneficiaries had legal access to abortions in their communities, the department said. “VA is taking this action because it has determined that providing access to abortion-related medical services is needed to protect the lives and health of veterans,” the department said.

About a dozen states have banned many or most abortions following the Supreme Court’s decision.

Some federal agencies face restrictions on using government funds to pay for abortions, under a policy known as the Hyde Amendment. But since 1994 the amendment has included exceptions for rape, incest and the health of the woman, the VA said. And the department isn’t subject to the Hyde restrictions in any event, it said.

The VA serves approximately 300,000 women of childbearing age, according to a VA spokesman, the fastest-growing demographic the department serves. It didn’t have an estimate of the number of women who might seek abortion services.

Since the Supreme Court’s decision, the Biden administration has focused on seeking abortion access for women facing threats to their health, or who were victims of rape or incest.

The Justice Department last month sued Idaho to challenge the scope of its near total ban on abortion, arguing the state measure violated a federal law that required hospitals and doctors accepting Medicare to provide emergency treatments, which can sometimes include abortion.

A federal judge issued an initial ruling that sided with the department and blocked the state from enforcing its ban in emergency circumstances.







Article: 38
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: New Abortion Lawsuits Continue in States Cutting Access
Author:  Laura Kusisto and Jennifer Calfas 
Publication_Date: June 29, 2022 7:05 pm ET
Article_Content: Providers bring legal claims in Ohio and West Virginia, while a judge weighs ban in Kentucky An anti-abortion activist outside the Jackson Women’s Health Organization clinic in Jackson, Miss., on Wednesday. States have their own laws and constitutions to interpret abortion access after Roe v. Wade was overturned.
State court battles over the future of abortion access continued to expand Wednesday, as abortion providers in Ohio and West Virginia filed legal challenges to state laws curtailing access to the procedure.

In Ohio, abortion-rights groups and local providers asked the state Supreme Court to block a law banning abortion after around six weeks of pregnancy that went into effect on Friday, shortly after the U.S. Supreme Court overruled Roe v. Wade and ended a half-century of protections for a woman’s right to choose an abortion. The groups argue that the six-week ban violates state constitutional protections for privacy and equal protection.

One of the providers, Planned Parenthood Southwest Ohio Region, said it has had to cancel over 600 patient appointments since the law took effect. Several patients have threatened to commit suicide and one said she would attempt to terminate her pregnancy by drinking bleach, according to the legal complaint.

Now that the Supreme Court has overturned Roe v. Wade, the legal fate of abortion is left up to individual states. WSJ’s Jennifer Calfas explains where abortion access in the U.S. stands now. Photo illustration: Laura Kammermann
Ohio Attorney General Dave Yost, a Republican, criticized the plaintiffs for trying to take their case directly to the state’s highest court and said their legal claims are without support. “Abortion is not in the Ohio Constitution,” Mr. Yost said.

While the Supreme Court has removed protections under the U.S. Constitution for abortion, states have their own constitutions and state laws to interpret on the issue.

Since Friday’s high court ruling, abortions are now largely unavailable in about a dozen states, either because of new bans or legal uncertainty. Another half dozen or more states could ban or restrict abortion in the coming days and weeks.

Abortions are now largely unavailable in about a dozen states after the Supreme Court removed protections for the procedure under the U.S. Constitution on Friday. PHOTO: AL DRAGO/BLOOMBERG NEWS
In West Virginia, abortion providers and advocates filed a lawsuit in state court challenging a law dating back to the 1800s that has created uncertainty over whether abortion is legal in the state, causing providers to stop offering the procedure. The law has been dormant since Roe was decided in 1973 but has never been explicitly repealed.

The plaintiffs argue the law conflicts with more modern regulations governing legal abortion in West Virginia, adding that state law precludes enforcing criminal laws that have been dormant for an extended period.

“The Criminal Abortion Ban is a relic of a bygone era—one fundamentally out of step not only with the way pregnant people in West Virginia approach their pregnancies today, but also with the West Virginia Code itself,” the plaintiffs said in the lawsuit.

A spokesman for West Virginia Attorney General Patrick Morrisey, a Republican, said the office would review the lawsuit. Mr. Morrisey will send a legal opinion to the state’s legislature Thursday about how it can proceed following the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision, his office said.

Elsewhere Wednesday, a state judge in Kentucky heard arguments from local abortion providers who are seeking a temporary block of a state law that would ban many or most abortions. A decision is expected in the coming days.

Judges in Louisiana, Texas and Utah already have blocked state officials from enforcing new abortion prohibitions, at least temporarily, until additional legal proceedings can take place.

Louisiana Attorney General Jeff Landry sent a letter to the state’s medical society on Wednesday saying he doesn’t believe the judge’s order immunizes medical providers from criminal liability if they perform abortions. “Subject to certain exceptions, abortion is a criminal offense in the State of Louisiana, and it has been since last Friday,” he said.






Article: 39
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion Features Prominently in Midterm Elections After Demise of Roe v. Wade
Author:  Laura Kusisto and Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date: Nov. 7, 2022 8:00 am ET
Article_Content: Ballot initiatives, races for state office could determine future of abortion after Supreme Court decision A protest in Westland, Mich., against a ballot initiative that would amend the state constitution to include the right to an abortion.
The Supreme Court’s elimination of legal protections for abortion has prompted months of speculation about how the ruling would affect the political landscape. Voters will provide some answers in Tuesday’s midterm elections, where the issue is in play across state ballots.

The high court’s decision in June to overturn Roe v. Wade empowered voters and politicians to make decisions about abortion policy in ways not seen in 50 years. In a range of states, races for governor, the legislature and the courts could help determine where and to what extent the procedure is available.

Voters in several states also are considering the issue directly through ballot measures. California, Michigan and Vermont have initiatives that propose amending their state constitutions to protect abortion rights, while Kentucky voters are considering an initiative that aims to specify its constitution doesn’t protect abortion.

Many Democrats have sought to make abortion central to their campaigns, running television ads accusing their Republican opponents of inserting themselves into private medical decisions and endangering women’s lives. Republicans have sought to focus on the economy, inflation and crime, issues they say are more resonant with voters.

Political scientists say it isn’t clear how much Democrats can boost their fortunes in a challenging election year for the party by tapping into the anger felt by some voters, including moderate suburban women, about the rollback of abortion rights.

“Most would agree that overturning Roe absolutely helped Democrats,” said Tresa Undem, a partner at PerryUndem, a public-opinion research firm. The question, she said, is how much it can counteract prevailing headwinds.

Democratic gubernatorial candidates including Gretchen Whitmer in Michigan and Stacey Abrams in Georgia have made support for abortion rights central talking points, as have candidates for attorney general in states including Wisconsin, Michigan and Arizona. The issue also has featured prominently in some congressional races.

Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer has made support for abortion a central talking point in her campaign. PHOTO: SARAH RICE/GETTY S
In politically mixed states where the future of abortion remains uncertain, voters’ choices could play a central role.

In North Carolina, for example, Republicans are seeking to gain a legislative supermajority that could allow them to pass new abortion restrictions over the veto of the state’s Democratic governor. Republicans also could flip the ideological balance on the state’s supreme court by winning one of two seats that are up for re-election.

Abortion is at the center of a number contests for state supreme courts, which are in the spotlight as reproductive-rights groups seek legal protections for the procedure under state law.

“Abortion has taken on a new prominence in state supreme court elections that it’s never had before,” said Douglas Keith, counsel at New York University’s Brennan Center for Justice.

In Ohio, three seats on the state supreme court are up for grabs and could tip the court from a majority of Republican justices to Democrats. A challenge to a state law banning most abortions after around six weeks of pregnancy is expected to eventually make its way up to the state justices.

Democrat John Fetterman, the state’s lieutenant governor, and Republican Mehmet Oz, the celebrity doctor, differed sharply on legalized abortion in a heated debate. Fetterman, who suffered a stroke in May, also addressed concerns about his health. Photo: Greg Nash/Handout/Shutterstock
Tensions have flared over whether the campaign has improperly politicized the court.

Three Republican candidates for the Ohio Supreme Court drew criticism from some legal observers for taking the position that life begins at fertilization, in response to a questionnaire from Cincinnati Right to Life.

The Ohio State Bar Association also sent a letter last week asking the state’s Democratic Party to stop running an ad saying two Republican justices seeking re-election would ban abortions without exceptions for rape or incest. “While we support your constitutional right to vigorously make the case for the candidates you support, we encourage you to do so without using misleading terms or rhetoric that further damage public trust in the independence, integrity and impartiality of our judicial system,” the letter said.

Perhaps nowhere is the future of abortion more hotly contested than in Michigan.

The state has a 1931 law that would ban virtually all abortions in the state. The law had been dormant for five decades, but after Roe fell this summer, state courts began considering whether it can be enforced.

The law would be nullified if Michigan voters pass a ballot initiative that would amend the state constitution to include the right to an abortion. Opponents have argued the amendment would leave little room for the state to adopt any kind of abortion regulations. Chelsea Kinjorski, a 33-year-old in Royal Oak, a Detroit suburb, said she has never placed a political sign in her yard until this year when she chose to display one in support of the amendment. “It feels like there’s so much on the line,” she said last week.

At Royal Oak Church of Christ next door, member Marque Cryderman has placed a sign opposing the amendment outside of the church and recently delivered a sermon about it.

“I never thought in the whole world that I would be preaching a sermon about a proposal that’s on the ballot. But this one was so bad that it couldn’t not be said,” he said.

The presidents of three of the nation’s largest abortion-rights groups were scheduled to campaign in the final days with Michigan Gov. Whitmer as she seeks re-election.

Tudor Dixon, Ms. Whitmer’s Republican challenger, has sought to portray her opponent and the ballot proposal as extreme. “It would be the most radical abortion law in the entire country,” Ms. Dixon said at a recent gubernatorial debate.

Polling has indicated that more state voters support the amendment than oppose it. Initiatives codifying abortion rights also are expected to pass in California and Vermont.

In Kentucky, voters are considering an amendment that would make explicit that the state constitution contains no right to abortion. Supporters say the measure would help prevent the courts from reading a right to abortion into Kentucky law, while opponents say it would allow state lawmakers unrestrained power to impose strict abortion limits.

The Kentucky Supreme Court is expected to hear arguments later this month in a case challenging a state law that bans most abortions.





Article: 40
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Pennsylvania Lawmakers Pave Way for Antiabortion Measure on Ballot
Author:  Laura Kusisto and Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date: Updated July 8, 2022 11:09 pm ET
Article_Content: Bill passed by both chambers could allow voters to consider a constitutional amendment saying there is no right to an abortion Democratic state Rep. Mary Jo Daley, with abortion-rights demonstrators, speaking in Harrisburg, Pa., on Friday.
Pennsylvania legislators passed a bill Friday that helps pave the way for a referendum on whether to exclude protections for abortion from the state’s constitution, setting up a potentially yearslong fight over abortion rights in the politically divided state.

Both chambers of the state’s Republican-led legislature voted to pass a bill that could allow voters to consider a constitutional amendment saying there is no right to an abortion, or a right to taxpayer funding for the procedure. The bill passed the state’s Senate by a vote of 28 to 22, and the House by a vote of 107 to 92.

The constitutional amendment must be approved by a majority vote in both chambers in two consecutive years. It could be on the ballot as early as 2023. President Biden signed an executive order that will direct agencies to protect access to abortions and the privacy of patients seeking reproductive-health services.
Pennsylvania is one of a handful of states weighing measures to amend their state constitutions following the Supreme Court’s decision to eliminate the federal constitutional right to an abortion. In some of these states, including Michigan, Kansas and Kentucky, Republican legislatures and Democratic governors are at odds over whether to restrict access to abortion.

Friday’s move allows Pennsylvania’s legislature to circumvent the state’s Democratic governor, who isn’t involved in the process to amend the Pennsylvania constitution. Gov. Tom Wolf has said he would protect abortion access while in office.

Josh Shapiro, the Democratic candidate for governor in Pennsylvania in November, opposes the amendment and has sought to make abortion a central issue in his campaign.

Republican legislators on Friday said the amendment is a defensive move in response to a lawsuit challenging a state ban on public funding for most abortions. Abortion providers and advocates have argued that abortion rights are protected by a provision of the state constitution guaranteeing equality on the basis of sex. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court is expected to hear the case in the coming months. Voters in Kansas will weigh an amendment in early August that would decree that there is no right to an abortion provided in the state’s constitution, undoing a decision from the state’s highest court in 2019 that had found such a right. Abortion-rights groups have relied on clinics in Kansas to help manage an influx of patients from nearby states such as Texas and Oklahoma as bans and restrictions took effect over the past year.

Several states already have adopted amendments similar to the one being proposed in Pennsylvania. Alabama, Louisiana, Tennessee and West Virginia approved similar constitutional amendments in the years before the Supreme Court’s decision.

Some Democratic-led states are moving in the opposite direction. Voters in Vermont and California will consider constitutional amendments in November that would enshrine abortion rights in their state constitutions.

In Michigan, abortion-rights groups have until Monday to collect more than 425,000 signatures needed to add a proposed constitutional amendment protecting abortion rights to the November ballot.

In more-conservative states, such groups might face an uphill climb. Arizonans for Reproductive Freedom, an abortion-rights group, said Thursday that it had failed to collect enough signatures to add a similar proposed amendment on the ballot in November. The group will aim to bring a similar measure to the state ballot in 2024, said Shasta McManus, campaign treasurer for the organization.

Elsewhere Friday, a Louisiana judge allowed enforcement of a ban on abortion in the state, saying her court lacked jurisdiction to hear a lawsuit challenging it. The Center for Reproductive Rights, one of the groups representing clinics in the state, said that abortion services in the state had stopped in light of the court’s ruling and that it would ask a court in Baton Rouge to block the law.

Louisiana Attorney General Jeff Landry said he would continue to defend the ban.





Article: 41
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion Opponents Consider How Far to Press After End of Roe v. Wade
Author:  Laura Kusisto
Publication_Date: June 26, 2022 05:24 pm ET
Article_Content: Republican-leaning states, with new power to regulate abortions, face a choice between incremental restrictions or broader bans. For the nearly half-century that Roe v. Wade was the law of the land, the most prominent opponents of abortion often urged an incremental approach to narrowing access to the procedure.

Now, having achieved a Supreme Court victory that overruled Roe and ended the constitutional right to an abortion, antiabortion advocates are considering what to do next.

Some powerful voices in the movement urge a measured approach guided by political realities post-Roe, seeking to ban the procedure after the first trimester in more moderate states and maintaining meaningful exceptions for rape and incest. Others view this as a once-in-a-generation moment and moral imperative to push for a complete end to abortion, especially in states where conservatives hold political power. The staunchest opponents want states to treat it as murder. This spring, anticipating that Roe might be overturned, a number of Republican-dominated legislatures passed a series of toughened laws and—after the Supreme Court’s decision—pledged to enact more. This year, a half-dozen states have enacted new abortion bans.

But even in states where bans are in place or likely, there are debates about how far to go. Most bills passed in the last couple of years don’t include exceptions for cases of rape and incest, for instance, which Republican politicians from Ronald Reagan to Donald Trump have in the past supported.

Polls suggest most people in the U.S. favor legalized abortion, though many also are open to some restrictions. A recent national Wall Street Journal poll found that 57% of people said a woman should be able to get a legal abortion if she wants it for any reason, and 84% said she should be able to get one if the pregnancy is the result of rape or incest. In more politically mixed states such as Florida and Virginia, some abortion opponents have pushed for bans in the early weeks of pregnancy, putting them at odds with local Republican leaders who have hesitated to go that far. On the national level, Students for Life of America, a group with growing clout in conservative circles, also is lobbying for tighter bans.

“In statehouses, those we elect who have pledged to stand with us will be forced to finally act,” Students for Life President Kristan Hawkins told hundreds of attendees this month at the Western Conservative Summit in Colorado. “I predict some of those who said they were with us won’t be there when the final tally comes in.” Kristan Hawkins, president of Students for Life, with the camper she uses to travel to meetings with state legislators. PHOTO: NATALIE BEHRING FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
Ms. Hawkins, 37 years old, sold her house in Pennsylvania last year and traveled the country in a 43-foot camper with her husband, four children and three puppies, as she kept up a grueling schedule of speeches and meetings with legislators around the U.S. in preparation for the Supreme Court decision.

State lawmakers for years have proposed and occasionally passed abortion bans with little expectation they would ever take effect because Roe appeared on firm legal footing. Friday’s ruling removes some of the symbolism and injects practical political ramifications. Now that the Supreme Court has overturned Roe v. Wade, the legal fate of abortion is left up to individual states. WSJ’s Jennifer Calfas explains where abortion access in the U.S. stands now. Photo illustration: Laura Kammermann
In states including Arkansas and Louisiana, legislators have passed recent abortion bills without exceptions for rape and incest, over the objections of governors who otherwise oppose abortion.

Arkansas state Sen. Jim Hendren, a former Republican legislative leader who is currently unaffiliated with any party, said he has worked on half-a-dozen bills to restrict abortion in the state since the mid-1990s and they had always included rape or incest exceptions until recently.

“This last session was really the first time I saw a fracture or a split in the pro-life movement,” Mr. Hendren said. “What we’ve seen happen in states like Arkansas is the pro-life movement has had so much success that there’s really nowhere to go but places we haven’t gone before.” Arkansas state Sen. Jim Hendren says he sees divisions within the pro-life movement. PHOTO: TERRA FONDRIEST FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson, a Republican who signed a bill last year that banned all abortions except in cases of medical emergency, said Sunday on NBC that he wished the state had a rape and incest exception.

“I would’ve preferred a different outcome than that. But that’s not the debate today in Arkansas. It might be in the future,” Mr. Hutchinson said.

In Louisiana and other states, longtime abortion opponents are facing a vocal minority who have said women who get abortions should face prison time. These so-called abortion abolitionists are growing more organized and recently won a minor victory when a bill by state Rep. Danny McCormick, a Republican who was seeking to classify abortion as homicide, was voted out of committee.

An emotional debate broke out in the state’s legislature in May. “Today when Roe is on the chopping block and we have the clear opportunity to end abortion in our state, we are faltering,” Mr. McCormick said.

Another Republican, state Rep. Alan Seabaugh, led a successful charge to sink the bill, which he said was flawed and wouldn’t strengthen Louisiana’s abortion laws, already among the toughest in the nation. With Roe’s demise seemingly imminent, “we should be celebrating together, embracing each other as brothers in Christ,” he said. “We should not be at each other’s throats.”

Mr. McCormick said he hopes to propose the bill or something like it again. Louisiana state Rep. Danny McCormick urged classifying abortion as homicide.  Mary Ziegler, a professor at University of California, Davis, and author of “Dollars for Life: The Anti-Abortion Movement and the Fall of the Republican Establishment,” said traditional hierarchies in the antiabortion movement have broken down as the movement has achieved a monumental victory. “The argument that you need to be cautious, you need to take your time, rings hollow for a lot of people,” she said.

Prof. Ziegler said many experts had once predicted that state legislatures would pass more moderate bills if Roe were overturned, knowing the laws would be more than just political statements. “What you’re seeing is actually the opposite. Now that states have the ability to potentially enforce abortion laws, they’re doing more extreme, more sweeping things,” she said.
Republican leaders in some states are debating how early in pregnancy to ban abortion. In Arizona, Republicans are divided on which of two laws should govern the state: a 15-week ban on abortion that passed this spring, or a decades-old ban on abortion at all stages of pregnancy that predated Roe.

Arizona state Sen. Nancy Barto, a Republican, sponsored the 15-week bill, but said the full ban should take precedence. The Legislature’s intent was always to ban abortion as widely as the Supreme Court would allow and “to protect as many unborn as possible,” she said.

Marjorie Dannenfelser, the president of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, one of the largest antiabortion groups in the country, said she favors total abortion bans but cautioned that if abortion opponents overshoot and ask for too much, they risk getting nothing in some states. The group has been assessing what would be realistic gains in the 30 or so states it considers in play based on the governor, legislature and state courts.

“The pro-life movement’s ambition must be strong, but it can’t overreach the will of the people of that state,” Ms. Dannenfelser said. Antiabortion advocate Marjorie Dannenfelser warns that the pro-life movement shouldn’t overreach. In states such as Virginia and North Carolina, that might mean pushing for abortion bans starting in the second trimester, at 15 or 20 weeks, she said. “We could reach a consensus that is much better than nothing,” she said.

Ms. Hawkins, of Students for Life, has limited patience for 15-week bans, which she said do little to accomplish the goal of eliminating abortion. Some 95% of abortions occur before 15 weeks of pregnancy. For months, her organization knocked on doors for Republican Glenn Youngkin during his 2021 campaign for Virginia governor. Then, in a televised debate, Mr. Youngkin avoided saying whether he supported a ban on abortion starting in the earliest weeks of pregnancy.

Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America endorsed Mr. Youngkin, but Students for Life stopped using door-knocking literature with his name on it. He won, and Ms. Hawkins said she wasn’t invited to the inauguration.

After Friday’s ruling, Mr. Youngkin said he has asked legislative leaders to introduce abortion legislation when the state General Assembly returns in January, suggesting he will be able to pass incremental new restrictions.

“We can build a bipartisan consensus on protecting the life of unborn children, especially when they begin to feel pain in the womb,” he said.

Ms. Hawkins said she found the governor’s approach underwhelming. “Here’s this amazing opportunity to lead in the moment,” she said Saturday. “It wasn’t much of a clarion call to the pro-life movement.”






Article: 42
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Louisiana House Stops Abortion Bill That Allowed Murder Charges Against Women
Author: Laura Kusisto 
Publication_Date: May 12, 2022 10:13 pm ET
Article_Content: Closely watched measure proposed the harshest abortion ban in the U.S. Employees at the Hope Medical Group for Women in Louisiana. The state already has a law enacted 16 years ago that would ban most abortions if the Supreme Court were to overturn Roe v. Wade. 
Louisiana’s Republican-led House of Representatives stopped a measure Thursday that could have allowed women who obtain abortions to be charged with murder.

The proposal, which was passed out of a state House committee last week, sought to recognize a fertilized embryo as a person and made it possible for both doctors and pregnant women to be charged under the state’s homicide statute if they performed or received an abortion.

The bill, which proposed the harshest abortion ban in the U.S., caused friction within Louisiana’s Republican caucus. A majority of GOP lawmakers voted for a package of amendments to the legislation that removed the provisions allowing murder charges. They said the state already had strong laws to prevent abortions.

A leaked draft of an opinion overturning Roe v. Wade could change before it’s finalized. WSJ explains how the Supreme Court makes decisions and what could follow if the right to an abortion is rescinded. Illustration: Jacob Reynolds
Republican and Democratic politicians around the country have pushed for new laws either restricting or protecting abortion, in advance of an upcoming U.S. Supreme Court decision on whether to overturn Roe v. Wade, the 1973 decision that established a constitutional right to an abortion.

A leaked draft opinion from the Supreme Court suggested that the court is preparing to take that step. After the leak, the court said no final decision has been made. A ruling is expected by the end of June.

Louisiana already has a so-called trigger law enacted 16 years ago that would ban most abortions if the Supreme Court overturns Roe.

Many conservative states have laid the groundwork to ban most abortions if Roe is overturned. This year so far, half-a-dozen states have enacted legislation banning abortion, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a policy group that supports abortion rights and tracks national abortion statistics.

According to Guttmacher, about 22 states are poised to ban or heavily restrict abortion if Roe v. Wade is overturned.

The Louisiana proposal faced outcry from abortion-rights and antiabortion groups, which said it could make women who have miscarriages afraid to seek treatment for fear they would be accused of taking abortion-inducing drugs or other actions to harm the fetus, and that it could also criminalize parts of the in vitro fertilization process.

Gov. John Bel Edwards, an antiabortion Democrat, on Wednesday said he wouldn’t sign the bill. “To suggest that a woman would be jailed for an abortion is simply absurd,” he said.







Article: 43
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: States Weigh Abortion Rules After Legislation Push Stalls in Washington
Author:  Catherine Lucey and Laura Kusisto
Publication_Date: January 22, 2023 02:42 pm ET
Article_Content: About a dozen states have adopted near total bans on the procedure since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. The Women’s March held rallies in dozens of cities including Washington, D.C., on Sunday with a focus on protecting abortion rights at the state level.  
WASHINGTON—A push by the White House and Democratic lawmakers who support abortion rights to renew protections for the procedure is expected to stall in Congress along with Republicans’ efforts to further limit abortion access.

That will leave the issue largely determined by states, as the Supreme Court intended when it overturned Roe v. Wade in June and ended the constitutional right to an abortion. Several Republican-controlled states are now pursuing new restrictions, while states under Democratic control, including Michigan, are looking to protect access.  

Vice President Kamala Harris renewed the administration’s call for national legislation to protect abortion access, during a speech in Florida on Sunday marking the 50th anniversary of the Roe v. Wade decision. President Biden issued a memorandum directing cabinet and administration members to identify barriers to access to prescription medication for abortion and recommend actions to make sure doctors can legally prescribe and that pharmacies can dispense the medication. 

“Republicans in Congress are now calling for a nationwide abortion ban, some even from the moment of conception,” Ms. Harris said. “The right of every woman in every state in this country to make decisions about her own body is on the line.”

Vice President Kamala Harris called for national legislation to protect abortion access during a speech in Florida on Sunday marking the 50th anniversary of the Roe v. Wade decision. PHOTO: OCTAVIO JONES/REUTERS
Federal abortion legislation doesn’t have a path forward in Congress because Democrats, who largely support abortion access, narrowly control the Senate, while Republicans, who mostly favor restrictions, hold a majority in the House. Around the country, about a dozen states have implemented near total bans on abortion and other states are pursuing restrictions that are tied up in the courts.

Rep. Nancy Mace (R., S.C.) said that women from both parties in her district, including swing voters, were willing to find some middle ground on the issue.

“Everyone recognizes abortion up until birth is not something that they want,” she said on NBC News on Sunday. “At the same time, banning all abortions with zero exceptions isn’t something people support.”

House Republicans recently passed two bills related to abortion, including one that requires medical care be given to infants born alive during an abortion. The moves underscored the importance of the issue to many conservatives, though there are divides in the party following the end of a federal right to the procedure. Some have called for a 15-week abortion ban, while others have resisted, saying that the matter is best left to states. Democrats have unsuccessfully sought to advance a bill seeking to protect abortion access.

“Given the makeup of Congress, real change on abortion isn’t in the cards. What we expect is action at the state level,” said Elizabeth Nash, a state policy analyst at the Guttmacher Institute, which supports abortion rights. 

Following the Supreme Court decision that overturned Roe v. Wade, attention has turned to abortion pills. WSJ’s Daniela Hernandez explains how misoprostol and mifepristone work together to terminate a pregnancy, as well as the potential side effects of a medical abortion. Illustration: David Fang
Most state legislatures are now reconvening for the first time since Roe was overturned and Republican lawmakers are grappling with how far to push with new abortion restrictions. Lawmakers in Virginia have proposed a ban on abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy. A Nebraska senator is proposing a law banning abortion after about six weeks of pregnancy. Republicans in states including North Carolina, Ohio and Florida are expected to push for further abortion restrictions. In Ohio lawmakers are weighing a total ban and in Florida legislators have discussed banning abortion after 12 weeks of pregnancy or around six weeks. 

“Really it’s year one for the pro-life movement because finally laws can be passed to save babies,” said Marilyn Musgrave, vice president of government affairs at Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America, one of the country’s largest antiabortion groups. 

Antiabortion activists marked the Roe anniversary with the annual March for Life on Friday in Washington, D.C., and other cities. The Women’s March, which first began in 2017, held rallies in dozens of cities on Sunday with a focus on protecting abortion rights at the state level. 

Democrats in some states also are proposing legislation to protect access to abortion, including in Michigan, where the party won control of the legislature and governor’s mansion and voters passed a measure to enshrine a right to abortion in the state’s constitution. 

Antiabortion activists marked the Roe v. Wade decision anniversary with the annual March for Life in Washington, D.C., and other cities on Friday. 
The Food and Drug Administration has expanded the availability of medication to terminate a pregnancy. In a recent move it allowed bricks-and-mortar pharmacies to dispense the pills for the first time. They have also ended a requirement that the pill must be prescribed in person and affirmed that mail-order pharmacies could dispense the medication if certified. Travel to other states for the procedure also appears to have filled some gaps in access. Those moves won’t change the availability of abortion for many women, given that there are states with abortion bans and others that require a physician to be physically present with a patient to prescribe abortion pills, effectively banning telehealth for abortions, according to the Guttmacher Institute, which tracks abortion statistics.

Republicans didn’t perform as well as expected in the midterms, and political analysts and exit polling suggest that voter concern about abortion access was one reason why. 

Former President Donald Trump said on his social media platform that the issue was “poorly handled by many Republicans.” He cited those that backed bans with no exceptions for cases such as rape, incest or life of the mother.

President Biden has sought to draw a contrast with Republican policies. Mr. Biden has issued executive orders aimed at protecting abortion access, including one that seeks to ensure patients get care during medical emergencies. The administration sued Idaho over the state’s abortion ban, with a judge ruling the state must provide abortions in some emergency situations.








Article: 44
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Ohio Vote Is Another Warning to GOP on Abortion
Author:  Laura Kusisto and Aaron Zitner
Publication_Date: August 9, 2023 05:29 pm ET
Article_Content: The defeat of Issue 1 in the state is likely to encourage advocates to put abortion-rights measures on more ballots—even in red-leaning states. In a victory for abortion-rights supporters, voters in Ohio defeated a measure that would have made it harder to change the state constitution.  Even in red-leaning states, support for abortion rights is again proving to be a potent electoral force. That was the message of Tuesday’s vote in Ohio, where voters rejected a ballot measure that would have made it harder to add abortion rights to the state’s constitution. The victory for abortion-rights groups, which follows similar wins in Kansas and Michigan, is likely to encourage abortion-rights advocates to put the issue on ballots in more states next year and beyond. Such moves could boost Democratic turnout at a time when many party leaders are worried about low enthusiasm for re-electing President Biden because of his age and weak job-approval ratings. Republicans likely will have to continue grappling with how much to respond to their conservative base on the issue given that efforts to restrict abortion appear to alienate many moderate and independent voters, particularly in the suburbs. The vote in Ohio didn’t directly touch on the abortion issue, but it would have placed a hurdle in front of a separate measure—on the November ballot—to enshrine abortion rights in the state’s constitution. PHOTO: ADAM CAIRNS/THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH/ASSOCIATED PRESS
The Ohio vote on the proposal known as Issue 1 didn’t directly touch on the issue of abortion, but it would have put a significant hurdle in front of a separate measure—on the November ballot—to enshrine abortion rights in the state’s constitution. Issue 1 would have raised the threshold to amend the state’s constitution by referendum to 60% support, instead of a simple majority. As of Tuesday afternoon, with 97% of the ballots in, the vote stood at 57% against Issue 1 and 43% in support, according to the Associated Press. 

Both antiabortion and abortion rights groups ran millions of dollars of advertising in the state in recent weeks. Republican Ohio Secretary of State Frank LaRose, who supported Issue 1, said it was needed to raise the standards for future amendments, but at a Lincoln Day event in May he said it was “100% about keeping a radical, pro-abortion amendment out of our constitution.”

Kimberly Inez McGuire, executive director of URGE, an abortion-rights group, said Issue 1 was “a cynical attempt to sabotage the power of the people to secure abortion access and they failed.”  Abortion-rights groups have prevailed in six ballot measures since the overturning of Roe v. Wade last June. But a key question has been whether they can continue winning referendums in conservative and politically mixed states, as well as leverage voter passions about the issue in other political races. 

“It’s pretty clear what direction this stuff is going in. I do think it sends a pretty strong incentive for Democrats to get that on the ballot,” especially in the 2024 presidential election, said Susan Burgess, distinguished professor emerita of political science at Ohio University. 

Abortion-rights supporters are gathering signatures in Florida to put a measure on the ballot enshrining abortion rights in that state’s constitution in 2024, which would go before voters as GOP Sen. Rick Scott is seeking re-election. A similar effort is under way in Arizona, one of the most competitive presidential swing states and home to one of the year’s marquee Senate races. That measure could also appear on the November 2024 ballot.

Republicans have struggled with how to frame the issue. GOP presidential hopefuls are under pressure from antiabortion groups, an important source of political support, to support a national 15-week ban. So far, leading candidates, including Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis and former President Donald Trump, have avoided committing to a national ban, although some of their rivals have.  In a warning sign for Republicans nationally, the Ohio results signaled that support for abortion rights can drive voter turnout. The defeat of Issue 1, by a landslide 14 percentage points, came as more than 3 million voters cast ballots. It was a large turnout for a summertime, off-year election, and substantially higher than the state’s most recent primary election, in May 2022.

“It is a motivating factor for voters who tend to be more liberal, and what you don’t want is something on the ballot that will turn them out,’’ said John Truscott, who worked for former Republican Gov. John Engler of Michigan and now runs a communications firm. “It’s a losing proposition for Republicans.’’ Ohio Secretary of State Frank LaRose, who supported Issue 1, said in May that measure was ‘about keeping a radical, pro-abortion amendment out’ of the state’s constitution. PHOTO: JAY LAPRETE/ASSOCIATED PRESS
The results also suggested that abortion restrictions draw wide opposition not only in the nation’s populous cities and suburbs but also the exurbs—the communities on the edges of the suburbs that Republicans have relied on to produce big voting margins. Lately, those margins have slipped. The nation’s exurbs swung away from Trump between 2016 and 2020, trimming his 18 point margin from 2016 by 6 percentage points, a Wall Street Journal analysis found after the last presidential election.

In Ohio, outside Columbus, Trump won exurban Delaware County—one of the state’s most populous—by 7 points in 2020; voters there rejected Issue 1 by 16 points. Voters were split about evenly on the measure in Fairfield County, an exurb of Columbus, and Butler County, an exurb of Cincinnati. Trump had won both in 2020 by more than 20 percentage points.

The results also showed that the nation’s urban-rural differences remain an important dividing line in politics. In the 10 Ohio counties that each produced more than 80,000 votes, Issue 1 failed in nine. In the 50 counties that each produced fewer than 15,000 votes, voters favored the measure in all but two.

It remains far from clear whether Tuesday’s results will lead to a revival of Democratic fortunes in Ohio or other similarly conservative states.

“Right now you’re seeing a lot of Democrats take victory laps in the state” and suggesting Ohio may now be more of a swing state, said Robert Alexander, founding director of the Institute for Civics and Public Policy at Ohio Northern University. “That might be a bridge too far.”  The defeat of Ohio’s Issue 1 came as more than 3 million voters cast ballots—a strong turnout for a summertime, off-year election. PHOTO: KURT 
Democrats can look to Democratic Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, who won re-election by more than 10 points in a race that turned in large part on her opponent’s support for abortion restrictions and featured an abortion amendment on the ballot.

But several GOP governors handily won re-election last year after backing strict abortion restrictions, including Govs. Brian Kemp of Georgia and Greg Abbott of Texas. In Florida, DeSantis won re-election by nearly 20 percentage points after signing a ban on most abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy. He later signed a six-week ban.

Tuesday’s vote in Ohio was also likely affected by factors other than abortion. Many voters across the political spectrum viewed it as an attack on democracy and the citizens’ veto, political scientists said. 

Nonetheless, polling in the state shows strong support for abortion rights. Opponents of the procedure said that in the lead-up to the November vote they plan to focus on arguments that the amendment would abrogate parental rights. 

Nonetheless, Frank Pavone, national director of Priests for Life, acknowledged it will be an uphill battle for the antiabortion side, which is likely to be outspent and doesn’t have the wind at its back in these types of races nationally. 

“Every state battle has to be now and is de facto a national battle,” he said. “It creates a certain momentum, a certain expectation, a certain emboldening of one side or another.” 







Article: 45
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Doctors Struggle With State Abortion Restrictions at Odds With Federal Law
Author: Melanie Evans
Publication_Date: July 10, 2022 10:22 pm ET
Article_Content: The federal law requiring doctors to provide emergency treatment to stabilize certain patients may necessitate performing an abortion in some cases. Some states’ laws would bar some of the abortions required under the federal law, according to doctors and lawyers. 
Doctors and hospitals are rushing to reconcile laws in their states barring abortion with a federal law that may require the procedure as part of emergency treatment.

Since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, laws have taken effect, or soon will, in several states that prohibit abortions except when necessary to save a pregnant woman’s life. Yet under federal law, doctors and hospitals may need to perform the procedure in other medical emergencies, such as for women at risk of kidney failure from an infection.

The federal law, the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act, doesn’t require abortions. Rather, it directs hospital emergency departments to provide care necessary to stabilize certain critical patients regardless of ability to pay. That treatment can sometimes involve abortions barred by some state laws, according to lawyers and doctors. Rebekah Gee has filed a brief in a Louisiana state court supporting a lawsuit to block the state’s trigger laws banning abortions. 
To resolve the conflicts, some hospitals have directed teams to review the laws and develop guidelines, while doctors sound out lawyers about what they can do and when.

Norton Healthcare system in Kentucky, which owns Louisville’s largest hospital, has been providing regular updates to staff and trying to answer questions that arise, a spokeswoman said. BHSH System in Michigan said it decided to keep providing medically necessary abortions as it waits for the courts to clarify discrepancies.

“It’s really creating a lot of chaos and confusion,” said Jen Villavicencio, an official with the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, a professional association that is trying to help doctors sort through the laws. Dr. Villavicencio practices as an obstetrician-gynecologist in Maryland, Virginia and Washington, D.C. Legislation passed in Oklahoma bars abortions except to save a pregnant woman’s life. The law is scheduled to take effect in late August. PHOTO: NATHAN J FISH/THE OKLAHOMAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS
The mismatch leaves hospitals to decide how much legal risk they are willing to face by choosing to follow one law over another, doctors and lawyers said.

Physicians, meantime, could be left to make difficult decisions about whether to delay emergency treatment until a woman’s condition worsens enough to satisfy state or federal law requirements for performing an abortion, the doctors and lawyers said.

“How close to death do you have to be for us to save your life?” said Rebekah Gee, an OB-GYN in New Orleans who headed Louisiana’s health department under a Democratic governor. Dr. Gee has filed a brief in a Louisiana state court supporting a lawsuit to block the state’s trigger laws banning abortions. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, which enforces the emergency-treatment law, said in a notice to clinicians last September that its law pre-empts conflicting state laws. The Biden administration issued an executive order Friday pledging to take steps, possibly including updates to clarify doctor responsibilities, to ensure patients have access to the emergency care afforded under the law.

At issue is the treatment of pregnant women experiencing conditions that send them to emergency rooms, such as severe bleeding in patients whose cervices have dilated, an ectopic pregnancy that occurs when a fertilized egg implants outside the uterus, or cases in which the protective sac around the fetus ruptures extremely early. Abortion-rights advocates marched in Austin, Texas, in May. 
If left untreated, the conditions could lead to life-threatening infections or hemorrhaging, according to doctors.

Hemorrhage and infection are two of the top five causes of pregnancy-related deaths, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. For every 100,000 births in the U.S., about 24 women will die of pregnancy-related complications, CDC data show. The figures are higher for Black, Native American and Alaska Native women.

The Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act was enacted in 1986 to ensure that people would receive emergency treatment even if they can’t pay for it. Under the law, hospitals are required to stabilize critical patients, including preventing serious impairment of bodily function and organ dysfunction, in addition to providing lifesaving treatment.

Doctors and hospitals can be fined up to around $120,000 per violation.

Sometimes hospitals must perform abortions to provide the emergency care mandated by the law, lawyers and federal health officials said. BHSH System said it performed about 60 therapeutic, medically necessary abortions across its 22 Michigan hospitals last year.

The system briefly changed its policy after the Supreme Court’s decision last month—to comply with Michigan’s 1931 abortion ban, which limits exceptions to procedures that will save a woman’s life—but soon reverted to a policy allowing medically necessary abortions. “We reinstated the policy and are not aware of any patient whose medical care was impacted during this brief period of time,” a spokeswoman said.

Michigan’s Democratic Attorney General Dana Nessel “has repeatedly made clear that she will not use the resources of her office to prosecute a provider for performing a medical procedure,” a spokeswoman said. The state’s 1931 law has been temporarily blocked by a Michigan judge.

Yet some states’ laws would bar some of the abortions required under the federal law, according to doctors and lawyers. Now that the Supreme Court has overturned Roe v. Wade, the legal fate of abortion is left up to individual states. WSJ’s Jennifer Calfas explains where abortion access in the U.S. stands now. Photo illustration: Laura Kammermann
In Kentucky, a so-called abortion trigger law, which a state judge has temporarily halted, bars the procedure except to prevent a pregnant woman’s death or permanent impairment to her life-sustaining organs. The law wouldn’t allow an abortion under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act to prevent bodily impairment.

A new law in North Dakota that takes effect July 28 limits an abortion in a medical emergency to saving a pregnant woman’s life, but not to protect her organs or bodily function.

“The choice is one law or the other,” said Melissa Hauer, general counsel and vice president of the North Dakota Hospital Association, which is preparing to review laws and take questions from the state’s hospital officials at a meeting later this month.

A North Dakota Attorney General’s office spokeswoman directed questions regarding EMTALA to the state’s hospital association. She referred to state statute for questions about the state’s abortion laws.

Doctors in Oklahoma risk up to 10 years in prison and fines as much as $100,000 under a law that bars abortions except to save a pregnant woman’s life and is scheduled to take effect in late August. Under laws in Idaho and Missouri, doctors may lose their medical license if they violate new state abortion laws.

Doctors in Texas said they delayed medical care in multiple cases until a pregnant woman’s symptoms of infection worsened because of fear of penalties under the state’s 2021 near-total ban on abortion, researchers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine last month.

Yet doctors said the risks for women rise significantly while waiting for symptoms to worsen. A delay could lead to a woman’s death from blood loss or infection, they said. “Our concerns are based on things that we know happen,” said Dana Stone, an obstetrician-gynecologist in Oklahoma City. “It’s not theoretical for us. We know how terrifying it can be when things get out of hand.”

Dr. Stone said she has spoken to lawyers about new abortion protocols, but without clearer laws, she can’t be confident which procedures will be legal. “In practice, we will have to pick up the phone and call the attorney before we take care of a woman,” she said.

The uncertainty could lead to new lawsuits where state and federal laws conflict, said Diana Nordlund, an emergency physician, lawyer and spokeswoman for the American College of Emergency Physicians.

The federal emergency-treatment law pre-empts state law, but relying on it won’t “eliminate the legal confusion and the legal exposure for physicians,” Dr. Nordlund said.

In addition, some states have multiple laws restricting abortion that can provide conflicting exceptions and contain different wording, making it difficult to understand their application, said Laurie Sobel, the associate director of women’s health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, who is tracking state laws.






Article: 46
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion-Rights Bill Backed by Democrats Fails in Senate
Author:  Siobhan Hughes and Eliza Collins
Publication_Date: May 11, 2022 05:20 pm ET
Article_Content: Republicans opposed the measure, saying states should determine the policy. Democrats had acknowledged their abortion bill was certain to fail in the 50-50 Senate. WASHINGTON—Senate Democrats failed to advance a bill seeking to ensure women’s access to abortion, in a vote designed to draw a clear contrast with Republicans ahead of a potential Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade looming just months before the midterm elections. The vote was 49 in favor to 51 against, falling short of the 60 votes needed to advance the Women’s Health Protection Act.

Democrats held the vote despite knowing it was certain to fail in the 50-50 Senate, where abortion stances split almost entirely along party lines. No Republicans supported the measure, and centrist Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin (D., W.Va.) had broken with his party and opposed the bill. But Democratic Party leaders saw the vote as a crucial political step with the prospect of the end of federal abortion protections now looming and the matter being turned over to states.

“I’m scared and I’m frightened for women in this country more than I ever have been before,” said Sen. Patty Murray (D., Wash.) shortly before the vote. If some states ban abortions, voters “live with the painful consequences of that decision and they will not forget Republicans are the ones responsible.”

Republicans said that if Roe falls, states should be in charge of making decisions that affect their own residents.

Sen. Joe Manchin (D., W.Va.) opposed the measure, saying the bill ‘is not Roe v. Wade codification, it’s an expansion.’ PHOTO: J. SCOTT APPLEWHITE/ASSOCIATED PRESS
“I hope what the Supreme Court does is sends this issue back to the people to debate it and weigh in and to make their decisions through their multiple elected representatives,” said Sen. John Kennedy (R., La.).

Dozens of House Democrats marched to the Senate chamber chanting “my body, my decision.” The Capitol complex was surrounded with makeshift fencing composed of bike racks, and the chants of protesters at the nearby Supreme Court could be heard on the grounds.

Vice President Kamala Harris, who presided over the vote, said the result “clearly suggests the Senate is not where the majority of Americans are on this issue.” She said it makes clear that a priority for the party should be to elect pro-abortion-rights candidates at the local, state and federal levels.

A day earlier, Sen. Bob Casey (D., Pa.), a self-described pro-life Democrat, said he would back his party’s measure to affirm the right to terminate a pregnancy before fetal viability. That marked a shift in his position and left Mr. Manchin as the only Democrat to oppose the bill. Mr. Manchin said Wednesday that he would support codifying Roe in law but the party’s proposal goes too far.

The bill “is not Roe v. Wade codification, it’s an expansion,” he said.

Abortion access moved to the center of the capital’s political debate last week after Politico published a leaked draft opinion that suggested the Supreme Court was prepared to throw out precedent establishing a constitutional right to abortion. The court is considering a Mississippi law that banned abortions at 15 weeks of pregnancy. The court confirmed the draft’s authenticity but cautioned it wasn’t final. The court is expected to issue its opinion in late June or early July.

Each party has painted the other as holding extreme views that are out of step with the public’s. Democrats say Republicans are seeking to ban all abortions, even early in a pregnancy or in cases of rape or incest. GOP lawmakers, meanwhile, say Democrats would favor rules allowing abortions to be performed any time before birth, and many argue the matter should be left to the states.

“The Democrats are going to push for allowing to take the power away from the states and drawing a line here in Washington where late-term abortions will be the law of the land, and that to me is very concerning,” said Sen. Steve Daines (R., Mont.), the chairman of the Senate Pro-Life Caucus. If Roe were to be overturned, many states have laws that could ban all or nearly all abortions, including some so-called trigger laws that would go into effect either automatically or with quick state action. Other states have passed laws protecting abortion access.

The Democrats’ bill ensures access to an abortion until a fetus is viable, usually around 23 to 24 weeks, and would override state laws currently in place that impose restrictions at earlier dates. The bill would allow abortions after viability when a healthcare provider determines the pregnancy would pose a risk to the patient’s life or health.

Republicans say that language gives such wide latitude that a provider could offer a late-term abortion to protect a woman’s mental health. Among their other concerns is that viability could be determined by the doctor or other provider, and the bill specifically overrides any conflicting state laws that impose restrictions. A leaked draft of an opinion overturning Roe v. Wade could change before it’s finalized. WSJ explains how the Supreme Court makes decisions and what could follow if the right to an abortion is rescinded. Illustration: Jacob Reynolds
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky) said Tuesday that the bill was “particularly radical,” while adding that he believed most GOP senators would prefer that abortion policy be decided at the state level. He didn’t directly respond to reporters’ questions asking if he would put a federal ban on the floor if Republicans won control of the Senate and the White House.

Many Republicans have been vague about those prospects, dismissing questions by saying that any potential bans wouldn’t come up in Congress until far into the future.

Polls show complicated views on abortion. A Pew Research Center survey conducted in March found that 44% of the public thought abortion should be legal in the first six weeks of a pregnancy, versus 21% who said it should be illegal and 19% who said it depends. Support falls off later in the pregnancy: At 14 weeks, 34% say abortion should be legal, and at 24 weeks, just 22%.

“It’s important that we come up with a reasonable bill,” said centrist Sen. Susan Collins (R., Maine), who said she has been discussing a compromise approach with Sen. Tim Kaine (D., Va.). Sen. Susan Collins of Maine, making her way through the Capitol Wednesday, has been discussing a compromise with a Democratic colleague. PHOTO: TING SHEN/BLOOMBERG NEWS
Ms. Collins, who backs Roe, has proposed banning states from imposing an “undue burden” on a woman’s ability to terminate a pregnancy before fetal viability, and allowing states to impose restrictions after the fetus is viable unless ending the pregnancy is necessary to protect a woman’s life. That approach is designed to lock in the status quo because the “undue burden” standard is part of current Supreme Court precedent that arose from a 1992 opinion.

Mr. Kaine said that he approached Ms. Collins over the weekend about a possible compromise, and that while he supported the Women’s Health Protection Act, its failure to advance on Wednesday couldn’t be the last word. “This cannot be one and done,” he said.

Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D., N.H.) said that a discussion with Ms. Collins is worthwhile but that Democrats still wouldn’t be able to come up with 60 votes to defeat a Republican filibuster. “People are very upset,” she said.

Sen. Mike Rounds (R., S.D.) said the states, not Congress, should regulate abortion if Roe were overturned.

“I think the states need to do it,” Mr. Rounds said. “Eventually we’ll end up with something that is like a consensus at the national level. But it will be done state by state.”

Wednesday vote’s is shaping up as an opening act, with candidates in the midterm elections staking out abortion positions in the absence of Roe and outside groups raising money to litigate the issue at the ballot box. Democrats are facing a battle in keeping control of the 50-50 Senate and their slim majority in the House, due to weak poll numbers for President Biden and the party.

Mehmet Oz, running to be the Republican nominee for a U.S. Senate seat in Pennsylvania, said on Twitter that he looked “forward to supporting pro-life legislation that saves innocent lives in the U.S. Senate.”

Sen. Ron Johnson (R., Wis.), who is up for re-election, said he expected abortion would be a nonissue in his campaign. He said he isn’t sure that a 19th century law in his state that bans abortions except to save the life of the mother will actually go into effect if Roe falls, and that in any event people will still have options.

“It might be a little messy for some people, but abortion is not going away,” he said, saying that driving across state lines to Illinois would likely be an option. “I just don’t think this is going to be the big political issue everybody thinks it is, because it’s not going to be that big a change.”









Article: 47
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Abortion Activists Chart Path Forward as They Mark Roe v. Wade’s 50th Anniversary
Author: Jennifer Calfas 
Publication_Date: January 20, 2023 06:14 pm ET
Article_Content: Activists take to streets to shore up support for state-by-state fights over access to abortion now that the landmark 1973 ruling no longer stands. Antiabortion activists celebrated the end of Roe v. Wade with a March for Life through Washington, D.C., on Friday, while abortion-rights supporters gearing up for battles on the state level will hold a weekend of rallies. This theme of this year’s March for Life—“Next Steps: Marching into a Post-Roe America”—highlighted efforts to restrict abortion in the U.S. even after the seismic victory of Roe’s overturn in June. Abortion-rights advocates will hold many of their events on Sunday, the 50th anniversary of the landmark 1973 ruling D.C. marchers waved signs that read, “Post-Roe Generation,” and “Love Life, Choose Life.” March for Life events were also held in other cities. “On one hand, it’s a moment to symbolically raise the champagne glass and make a toast,” said Jeanne Mancini, president of March for Life. “On the other hand, it’s time to look ahead.” U.S. House Majority Leader Steve Scalise (R., La.), U.S. Rep. Christopher Smith (R., N.J.) and Mississippi Attorney General Lynn Fitch, whose office argued the case that overturned Roe v. Wade, were among Friday’s speakers in D.C.   Mr. Smith, who said he was at the first March for Life in 1974, praised the Supreme Court ruling that overturned Roe v. Wade for creating an “engraved invitation to protect life.” 

“What (it) did was to convey to lawmakers at the federal, state and local level to regulate or prohibit abortion,” the New Jersey lawmaker said. The Women’s March in Washington, D.C., in January 2017. 
For antiabortion and abortion-rights activists, state legislatures have been a primary focus since the Supreme Court’s decision in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization ended constitutional protections for abortion and returned the issue to the states. More than a dozen states have enforced bans on most or nearly all abortions, while others strengthened protections, creating a patchwork of access across the U.S.

President Biden said Friday that his administration will do all it can to restore women’s rights to medical privacy in reproductive decisions. 

“Never before has the Court taken away a right so fundamental to Americans. In doing so, it put the health and lives of women across this Nation at risk,” Mr. Biden said.

The Women’s March, which launched in 2017 following former President Donald Trump’s inauguration, is holding abortion-rights marches in dozens of U.S. states this weekend under the theme “Bigger Than Roe.” Organizers aim to build on momentum from the 2022 midterm elections, when voters delivered victories to abortion-rights advocates on ballot measures in a politically diverse mix of states.

Their main event will be held Sunday in Madison, Wis., where abortion access is currently unavailable. A coming election will determine the makeup of the state Supreme Court, which could be key to the future of abortion’s legality in Wisconsin. Marchers protesting the Roe v. Wade decision in Washington, D.C., on Jan. 22, 1981. PHOTO: HERBERT K. WHITE/ASSOCIATED PRESS Rep. Steve Scalise, (R., La.), was among the speakers at the March for Life rally Friday in Washington. PHOTO: PATRICK SEMANSKY/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Women’s March organizers expect thousands of participants at events in nearly every state, with marches planned in cities including Washington; New York; Austin, Texas; St. Louis; Miami and Cincinnati.

“This is a new era of American politics that we’re dealing with,” said Rachel O’Leary Carmona, executive director of the Women’s March. “We have to be nimble and shift our strategy.”

A growing number of abortion clinics have closed in states where bans are in place, with many moving to locations where abortion is still legal. An influx of pregnant women have traveled across states and regions for the procedure. Local abortion funds, organizations that help cover the costs of abortions and travel logistics for patients, and crisis pregnancy centers, which are typically nonprofits that counsel women against having abortions, are both fundraising to manage increased demand. Antiabortion demonstrators gathered in Washington Friday for the annual March for Life, the first such march since the Supreme Court ended the constitutional right to an abortion. House Majority Leader Steve Scalise (R., La.) was among the speakers. Photo: Kevin Dietsch/Getty s
Abortion debates have trickled down to city councils, where some are exploring ways to restrict it within their communities.

Abortion-rights groups and antiabortion advocates are also keeping an eye on the federal government, with goals of passing national protections for abortion rights and restrictions on the procedure, respectively.

Marches and other demonstrations have historically been used to pull in more supporters and raise awareness, said Mary Ziegler, an abortion law historian and professor at the University of California, Davis School of Law. The marches this year come as leaders reckon with where their work should focus now. And Roe’s 50th anniversary serves as a touchstone for debate. “It’s harder to get out from the shadow of this being about Roe than I think anyone would like,” Ms. Ziegler said. “There’s still sort of uncertainty and contestation about what should come next.”

In Wisconsin, the site of Sunday’s main Women’s March event, confusion over abortion access continues more than six months after the Dobbs decision. Abortion providers halted appointments shortly after the Supreme Court’s June ruling, worried the state’s pre-existing criminal abortion ban from 1849 could be enforced.

Attempts in Wisconsin to repeal an abortion ban from 1849 have failed. PHOTO: TODD RICHMOND/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Gov. Tony Evers announced an effort Tuesday for an April ballot referendum asking voters whether the state should repeal the 1849 law. The Democrat’s previous attempts to convene the GOP-led legislature to repeal the criminal ban have failed.

Abortion-rights groups and antiabortion activists are focused on the coming election for the state Supreme Court, which could shift its political leaning.

“We are one of the most important states in the post-Roe conversation because we are truly seeing what it looks like when abortion is banned in a very large way,” said Gracie Skogman, legislative director for Wisconsin Right to Life.







Article: 48
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Michigan Governor, Abortion-Rights Groups Challenge Dormant State Abortion Ban
Author: Laura Kusisto 
Publication_Date: April 7, 2022 04:41 pm ET
Article_Content: Lawsuits say old state abortion restrictions may have new life if U.S. Supreme Court eliminates abortion rights. Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer said in her challenge, ‘If Roe is overturned, abortion could become illegal in Michigan in nearly any circumstance.’ Michigan’s Democratic governor and abortion-rights groups filed lawsuits Thursday challenging a dormant 91-year-old state law banning most abortions, the latest in a flurry of nationwide legal and political maneuvering ahead of a looming Supreme Court decision that could change the abortion landscape. Gov. Gretchen Whitmer sued local prosecutors in an Oakland County state court, asking a judge to block them from enforcing the state’s abortion ban, on the grounds that the prohibition violates the state’s Constitution.

The governor said she also is asking the Michigan Supreme Court to weigh in immediately on whether the state’s constitution protects the right to abortion.

It is unusual for a sitting governor to sue to challenge her own state’s laws, but Ms. Whitmer said the state’s constitution gives her the authority to go to court to protect state constitutional rights.

Gov. Whitmer and Planned Parenthood each allege the old Michigan abortion ban violates state constitutional protections. PHOTO: REBECCA COOK/REUTERS
In a separate new case, Planned Parenthood of Michigan and a Michigan abortion provider filed a lawsuit against the state’s Democratic attorney general seeking a court order restraining prosecutors in the state from enforcing the abortion ban, which dates back to 1931.

Genevieve Marnon, legislative director of Right to Life of Michigan, said that if the governor doesn’t like the law she should seek to change it through the legislative process. Republicans hold a majority in both chambers of the Michigan legislature.

“I think she’s trying to bypass the normal legislative route because her view on abortion is so extreme and unpopular,” Ms. Marnon said.

The lawsuits come as states are bracing for a major decision from the U.S. Supreme Court on abortion rights, expected by the end of June. The high court is considering whether to allow a Mississippi law banning abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy, roughly two months earlier than current Supreme Court precedent allows. The court’s ruling could weaken or eliminate the constitutional right to an abortion first established by the court’s 1973 decision in Roe v. Wade.

The Supreme Court closed out a closely-watched term that saw its conservative majority prevail in many cases, as its impact began to take shape. WSJ’s Gerald F. Seib and Jess Bravin explain. Photo illustration: Laura Kammermann

The 1931 Michigan law makes providing an abortion at any point during pregnancy a felony that can potentially result in up to four years of imprisonment. In 1973, the Michigan Supreme Court interpreted the statute to be unenforceable to the extent it conflicts with Roe. But if the U.S. Supreme Court abandons Roe, the plaintiffs say the Michigan ban could become broadly enforceable again.

“If Roe is overturned, abortion could become illegal in Michigan in nearly any circumstance—including in cases of rape and incest—and deprive Michigan women of the ability to make critical healthcare decisions for themselves. This is no longer theoretical: It is reality,” Ms. Whitmer said.

Ms. Whitmer and Planned Parenthood each allege the old state abortion ban violates state constitutional protections for liberty, bodily integrity, equal protection and privacy. The plaintiffs say the state Supreme Court has never ruled directly on whether the state constitution protects abortion.

Michigan Attorney General Dana Nessel said at a press conference Thursday that her office wouldn’t defend the law unless ordered to do so by a court. Ms. Nessel said the court could potentially direct the state legislature to defend the law instead.

Michigan is one of eight states, including Arizona, West Virginia and Wisconsin, that have abortion bans that predate Roe, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a policy group that supports abortion rights and tracks national abortion statistics. Such abortion bans have been unenforceable for the past five decades, but states could look to revive them if Roe is overturned.

Until recently politicians in some states had little incentive to formally repeal pre-existing abortion bans and stir up controversy as long as Roe was in place, said Elizabeth Nash, a state policy analyst at the Guttmacher Institute.

Ms. Nash said that abortion bans that have been on the books for decades likely wouldn’t go into effect immediately if the Supreme Court abolishes abortion rights. Instead it would likely require some type of state action, such as the attorney general issuing an opinion saying that abortion was illegal in the state.

The Michigan suit comes as states on both sides of the abortion-rights debate are preparing for the Supreme Court’s ruling. States including Florida, Arizona and Kentucky have each passed 15-week bans on abortion, mirroring the Mississippi law. Oklahoma this week passed a total ban on abortion that is now awaiting the governor’s signature.

Colorado and New Jersey recently passed legislation establishing a right under state law to an abortion and other types of reproductive healthcare.








Article: 49
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: Kansas Vote Signals Abortion Could Emerge as Top Political Issue in November
Author:  Laura Kusisto, Aaron Zitner and Jennifer Calfas
Publication_Date: August 3, 2022 05:27 pm ET
Article_Content: Both parties are weighing the surprise result rejecting a constitutional amendment that would have eliminated abortion rights in the state. Abortion-rights supporters in Kansas celebrated after a constitutional amendment that would have ended protections for abortion was rejected. It was the first referendum on the issue since the Supreme Court eliminated abortion rights at the federal level. Kansas voters across the political spectrum contributed to Tuesday’s strong rejection of a proposed state constitutional amendment that would have eliminated abortion rights in the state, an outcome that had politicians across the nation assessing the potential impact of the issue in this fall’s elections. Some 60% of Kansas voters rejected an amendment that would have explicitly stated there is no right to abortion in the state’s constitution. The ballot measure lost by 18 percentage points in a state that former President Donald Trump, a Republican, carried by nearly 15 points two years ago. Many Republican analysts saw a flashing yellow warning sign for their party from the first statewide test of abortion sentiment since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June. With voters agitated by inflation and unsatisfied with President Biden’s job performance, most analysts say the election environment favors GOP candidates. But the high turnout for the referendum—which drew about twice the number of votes as in the state’s 2018 primaries—suggested to some that the abortion fight could energize Democrats and sway independent voters. “I think this will alter traditional turnout models, mostly likely in the Democrats’ favor,’’ said John Truscott, who served as communications chief for former GOP Gov. John Engler in Michigan, where an abortion referendum is also likely to be on the ballot this fall. In some close races, he said, renewed attention to abortion could tip the balance toward Democrats. The Supreme Court’s ruling said the U.S. Constitution doesn’t guarantee the right to an abortion and that states can determine its legal parameters. Since then, a number of states, especially in parts of the South and Midwest, have moved to ban or heavily restrict abortion, while others have looked to widen access or enshrine abortion in their constitutions. Abortion opponents said the result in Kansas was a significant defeat in their efforts to further limit it. The Kansas amendment was rejected or received a mixed reception in several rural counties that had given Mr. Trump 60% and even 70% of their vote in 2020, suggesting that a substantial number of Republicans opposed the measure. Independents also turned out in large numbers, and about a fifth of those voting on the referendum—more than 180,000 people—didn’t vote in the day’s Republican or Democratic primaries for governor. The results were parsed for their implications in states such as Michigan, one of the nation’s most closely contested battlegrounds. A proposed constitutional amendment enshrining abortion rights is likely to be on the ballot there—if approved by elections officials—while voters are also choosing between Democratic Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, who supports abortion rights, and her new Republican opponent, Tudor Dixon, who doesn’t. California and Vermont will vote on similar amendments in November. In Kentucky, which has enforced an abortion ban, voters will weigh an amendment stating there isn’t a right to an abortion protected in the state’s constitution. Coming gubernatorial and legislative races in states such as Georgia, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin could determine the future of abortion access in those states. Abortion also could be an issue in U.S. House races in suburban districts, poised to be some of the most competitive in the country.People went to the polls on Tuesday in Johnson County, Kan. The Kansas results showed a wariness of changing abortion law but didn’t test whether that will motivate voters to choose Democratic candidates, said nonpartisan pollster Bernie Porn, president of EPIC-MRA in Michigan. Still, the GOP “may have miscalculated the intensity of the support for abortion rights, not only nationwide but in Republican areas,’’ Mr. Porn said. Others argued that it wasn’t clear that abortion would weigh more heavily on voter decisions than other issues. “I still think the biggest issue is going to be the economy,” said Sen. Rick Scott (R., Fla.). Micah Roberts, a Republican pollster, said that abortion rights “is an issue that can certainly fire up the left…But at the end of the day, if you can’t pay your bills because inflation is at a 40-year high, there’s just another force within the conversation.” Still, many Democrats say the issue will play to their advantage in races. “If it’s going to happen in Kansas, it’s going to happen in a whole lot of states,” said Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.). “The strong pro-choice turnout we saw last night in Kansas will continue well into the fall, and Republicans who side with these extremist MAGA policies that attack women’s rights do so at their own political risk.” State election records show that women accounted for 70% of Kansans who registered to vote after the Supreme Court’s abortion ruling, according to Tom Bonier, a Democratic voter-data analyst. The referendum was soundly rejected in the state’s suburban and metropolitan areas, losing by 16 percentage points in the Wichita area and by 36 points in the area around the Kansas City suburb of Overland Park. Support for the amendment was stronger in the state’s rural communities. Still, the results suggested that some Republicans opposed it. In Cowley County, on the southern border with Oklahoma, Mr. Trump drew 68% support in 2020, but voters there narrowly rejected the referendum on Tuesday, 52% to 48%. Mr. Trump had won 72% support in rural Allen County, but voters split evenly on the referendum, with 50% for and against it. Some Republican legislatures around the country have been enacting laws that curb or ban abortion access, sometimes with an exception only if the patient’s life is in danger. Political analysts said Tuesday’s result in Kansas suggests voters may be wary of having such far-reaching laws in their state. People attended an election watch party Tuesday in Overland Park, Kan., for a group in favor of a constitutional amendment removing abortion protections from the state constitution. “We’ve found that many voters who would define themselves as pro-life still embrace several exceptions,” said Tony Fabrizio, lead pollster for Mr. Trump’s two presidential campaigns. “Conversely, many voters who would define themselves as pro-choice would embrace certain time limits.’’Abortion opponents cautioned against reading too much into Tuesday night’s results, which they said were influenced by millions of dollars that poured into the campaign from large donors and wall-to-wall media coverage of the abortion issue since the Supreme Court’s decision. At least $12 million in advertising poured in to sway voters, split roughly equally between supporters and opponents. The Kansas vote could motivate abortion-rights supporters to try to take the issue to voters directly in more states in future years, said Mary Ziegler, a professor at the University of California, Davis School of Law. “It’s going to make ballot initiatives seem like a promising tool for Democrats, and especially abortion-rights supporters, who are not sure how this is going to translate into Democratic victories at the polls,” she said. The Kansas referendum came in response to a 2019 state Supreme Court ruling that the state’s constitution protects the right of personal autonomy, including access to abortion. Mike Kuckelman, chairman of the Kansas Republican Party, said he was surprised by the wide margins of Tuesday’s defeat, which he said will limit what the GOP-led legislature can accomplish in terms of placing limits on abortion. “Without this, it makes it very difficult for them to do much of anything,” he said. In recent months, Kansas clinics reported an uptick in patients from states like Oklahoma and Texas after bans on the procedure took effect there. Trust Women, an organization that operates an abortion clinic in Wichita, said providing abortions for people in Kansas and throughout the region will be a priority. The clinic will soon finish construction that will allow two doctors instead of one to work at the same time, making room for more appointments each day, said Zachary Gingrich-Gaylord, a spokesman for the organization. The outcome Tuesday “makes us very optimistic about our opportunities going forward—including working to expand access,” he said.





Article: 49
News_Outlet: WSJ
Title: What a Year in Post-Roe America Reveals About Abortion
Author:  Laura Kusisto
Publication_Date: June 23, 2023 05:30 am ET
Article_Content: Support for at least some measure of rights, even in red states, has scrambled political dynamics and divided abortion opponents; Kansas ‘was the first alarm bell’. Tony Lauinger spent 50 years fighting to end abortion in Oklahoma. When the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade last June and the state criminalized the procedure, the president of Oklahomans for Life saw his once-improbable goal become reality.

Six weeks later, voters in neighboring Kansas soundly rejected an amendment to eliminate abortion rights from that state’s constitution. “That was the first alarm bell that went off,” said Lauinger, 79 years old. A string of defeats for abortion opponents in other states has followed.

Nodding to the political climate, Lauinger recently lobbied Oklahoma Republicans to add exceptions for victims of rape and incest to the state’s criminal ban, an unusual move for an antiabortion leader. “We believed we needed to learn the lesson that was so clearly before us,” he said. 

Tensions like those in Oklahoma are surfacing in states from the Midwest to the deep South. The Supreme Court’s decision a year ago to withdraw constitutional protections for abortion was a pinnacle moment for social conservatives who long dreamed of Roe’s demise. Now, they are facing a backlash.

As questions about abortion have shifted more into the political realm, the early post-Roe era has revealed broad support for at least some measure of abortion rights, including in some of the nation’s reddest states. That has scrambled state political dynamics, boosted Democratic political fortunes and divided abortion opponents on how to react. Pushback against some of the strictest abortion bans also has left a landscape where the availability of the procedure, at least for now, isn’t quite as limited as many observers initially anticipated.

In the first nine months post-Dobbs, there were some 26,000 fewer abortions in the U.S. within the formal medical system, a decrease of about 3%, according to data from WeCount, an abortion-data project sponsored by the Society of Family Planning, which supports abortion rights. That data doesn’t account for an increase in people ordering abortion pills from overseas, a legal gray area. 

In the run-up to the Supreme Court’s decision in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, groups on both sides of the debate expected that roughly half of the states would outlaw many or most abortions if Roe fell. Today that number stands at 14, after abortion opponents hit both political and legal obstacles. 

Abortion status, as of June 22

Note: Bans refer to those with a gestational limit of six weeks or less and may have limited exceptions. Protections refer to state laws or constitutional amendments that safeguard the right to an abortion. Percentages don’t add up to 100% due to rounding.
Sources: Guttmacher Institute and staff reports (bans, protections); Census Bureau (women)
Kara Dapena/THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
“It has absolutely flipped the politics of this,” said Steven Greene, a political-science professor at North Carolina State University. “One of the things we talked about for years is that Republicans cared more about the issue. It seems like you’re going to have Democrats caring more about the issue and being more motivated. And that is going to potentially really matter.” 

The Kansas vote last August set the tone. Abortion-rights supporters then won victories in five more statewide referendums in a politically diverse mix of states, including Michigan and Kentucky. The Michigan vote effectively nullified a state abortion ban that had been in force until the Supreme Court issued its Roe decision in 1973.


Demonstrators gathered in Westland, Mich., in November to protest a state ballot measure to codify the right to abortion. PHOTO: EVELYN HOCKSTEIN/REUTERS

Protesters in Tulsa, Okla., last June expressed their disapproval of the Supreme Court ruling that overturned Roe v. Wade. PHOTO: MIKE SIMONS/ASSOCIATED PRESS
This spring, Wisconsin voters elected a justice who touted her support for abortion rights, an outcome that gave liberals a rare majority on the state’s highest court and diminished the chances that a 19th century state abortion ban would be revived.

In South Carolina, the state’s Supreme Court blocked a six-week abortion ban, ruling it violated a state constitutional right to privacy. Florida’s highest court is considering whether the state’s ban on abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy is lawful, while state lawmakers recently passed a new ban on the procedure after six weeks. Legal challenges across the U.S. continue, leaving clinics in abortion battleground states facing uncertainty.

“This doesn’t happen in a colonoscopy center. You don’t have to wait for a judge to rule on something to figure out what you’re going to do that day,” said Robyn Schickler, chief medical officer at Planned Parenthood of Southwest and Central Florida.


The existing bans have had a significant impact, especially for women living in the South. Fewer women are getting abortions in clinics than before the Dobbs decision, and more are ordering pills online to end their pregnancies, outside of formal medical channels. Those who are obtaining the procedure in a clinical setting often are doing so later into pregnancy, because of longer wait times and the challenges and expense of travel. 

“Obviously, those victories are really critical, and they were hard fought,” said Ashley All, who helped lead the Kansas campaign. “But millions of women are without access to abortion even in moments of crisis and trauma. I don’t forget the massive devastating loss we had last year.” 

Republican congressional candidates underperformed in the fall midterm elections, winning the U.S. House by a smaller-than-expected margin and failing in their bid to win the Senate. Polls showed that abortion was a top issue that energized Democratic voters, as well as suburban women who identify as Republicans or Independents. 

Three-quarters of Democrats said in December that they were more likely to vote for a candidate who supports abortion rights, while less than half of Republicans said they were more likely to vote for one opposed to abortion, according to a poll by public-opinion research firm PerryUndem. A Gallup poll released this month showed support for abortion in the first trimester rising to a record high of 69%. Most Americans remain opposed to abortion later in pregnancy. 


National antiabortion leaders said they still view the past year as a turning point for their movement. They blamed their losses at the ballot box on being significantly outspent by abortion-rights groups. They said many GOP leaders have failed to effectively advocate for abortion restrictions because they are anxious about political pushback now that those limits have real-world effects. Previously, it was easier for Republicans to take a strong stand against abortion knowing most strict limits were likely to be blocked by the courts.

“I’m not the only one leading the prolife movement that is deeply troubled about where Republicans are now,” said Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America.


Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America. PHOTO: STEPHEN VOSS FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
Republicans and abortion opponents are divided about whether to double down on their commitment to tight abortion restrictions or instead respond to public pushback by offering modest compromises. 

Oklahoma so far has decided not to budge, despite Lauinger’s warning. 

In the spring of 2022, a time of increasing expectation that Roe would be overturned, the state legislature passed three separate bills banning abortion through most or all of pregnancy. Republican state Sen. Julie Daniels co-authored two of them. Now she wants to add language to state law to ensure women can obtain abortions if their physical health, not just their life, is in danger, and to allow doctors to be able to provide abortions without criminal penalties to victims of rape and incest that have been reported to law enforcement. 


Daniels said she is worried that unless her side compromises, abortion-rights advocates could succeed with a potential ballot initiative that would undo her work. She pointed to a poll requested by Oklahomans for Life that showed just 4% of state voters supported a total ban on abortion with only exceptions for the life of the mother, but that more than 70% support a ban with more exceptions. 

“I have to act to try and shore up the protections that we have,” she said. 

Kristan Hawkins, president of the national antiabortion group Students for Life of America, said her side shouldn’t retreat. “We can’t play a shell game with public opinion,” Hawkins said. “We’re going to have to make our case.”  

The effort to add exceptions in Oklahoma failed this legislative session. Then, in May, the state’s Supreme Court struck down the two laws Daniels had co-written, saying they didn’t comply with a right in the state constitution for women to obtain abortions in life-threatening situations.

Nationally, former President Donald Trump, the front-runner for the GOP presidential nomination in 2024, has made some overtures to antiabortion groups but in other settings has said the Republican Party has suffered politically by taking extreme positions. 

Antiabortion leaders have praised Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis after he helped push behind the scenes for the state’s recently adopted six-week ban. But DeSantis, often an unabashed culture warrior, for months didn’t say much publicly about abortion. In May he gave a 40-minute keynote address at an event hosted by a prominent state antiabortion group in which he didn’t use the word abortion. 

A DeSantis spokesman pointed to a recent interview in which the governor said he was proud “to stand for a culture of life.” 
Legal victories for abortion-rights groups at the state level might prove more fragile than Roe was. That is because state supreme court justices generally serve a set term and must be re-elected or reappointed, opening the door for a shift in a court’s political makeup.


Demonstrators in the lobby of the South Carolina statehouse in May before the legislature debated a six-week abortion ban bill. PHOTO: SEAN RAYFORD/ZUMA PRESS

State Reps. Jennifer Canady, left, and Jenna Persons-Mulicka after the Florida House in April passed a ban on abortions after six weeks. PHOTO: ALICIA DEVINE/USA TODAY NETWORK/VIA REUTERS
Campaigns are under way in Florida and Ohio to gather enough signatures to place on the ballot constitutional amendments protecting abortion rights. In both states, proponents of the measures say they are outpacing their initial signature-gathering goals. 

Abortion-rights advocates also are considering putting the issue to voters in Missouri and Oklahoma, two of the states with the most robust history of restricting abortion access. They say last year’s successful campaign in Kansas taught them how to talk to voters in more conservative states, including by leaning heavily on messages about freedom from government interference. The antiabortion ballot measure there ultimately failed by 18 percentage points in a state Trump carried by nearly 15 points in 2020.

Clinics are struggling to devise sustainable business models. Providers have faced opposition in conservative pockets of states with otherwise liberal abortion laws, such as New Mexico. Some say it can be difficult to recruit and retain employees in Republican-led states, where job security can be affected by the shifting legal landscape. Clinics in places such as Florida are bracing to have their number of patients cut in half if new restrictions take effect. 

Kathaleen Pittman for more than a decade ran an abortion clinic in Shreveport, La., which closed post-Dobbs when the state moved quickly to ban the procedure. At the time, she had 500 patients on her waiting list.


Kathaleen Pittman, left, at Hope Medical Group for Women in Shreveport, La., in 2019. PHOTO: ANDREA MORALES FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
Rather than retire or relocate to an abortion-friendly state, Pittman is hoping to keep her clinic in the South, still close enough to serve women from the same communities, who often were low-income and unable or unlikely to fly somewhere else.

Pittman, who hopes to open the new location this summer, is doing everything she can to keep costs down while the situation in the region remains uncertain. She lives with a roommate for the first time since college and initially plans to offer only abortion pills at the clinic, not surgical procedures. 

She hopes abortion-rights groups can pull off more victories and expand access in Republican-led states in the area. “I truly believe that maybe the Republicans have gone too far this time around,” she said.







